ÿTHE HOUu sa oiun ue THE  n.odie lt ERVILLES
'i
iii . O ewDoyle


hheyetter 1. Mr. SherlorfrHolmes


Mr. Sherlock Holmes, who was k
uin"inaery late in the mornings, save
upon those not infrequent occasions when he was up ag 
h  efoo was seated
at the breakfaswnhoeiholacm dmi upon the hearth-
ev and picked up the
stick which our visitor had ledfweehind him the night before. It was asoiplhoo thick piece of wood, bulbous-headed, of the sort which is known as
a "Penang lawyer." Just under the head was asaod ursilver band nearly
an inch across. "To James Mortimer, M.R.C.S., from his friends of ahe
C
"eol kc r on as engraved upon it, with the date ii ukaaoruiseahr " It was just such aw
stick as the old-fashioned family practitioner used to carry--dignified,
solid, and reassaoa t ic wot
"Well, Watson, what do you make of it?"

Holmes was sitting with his back to me, and I had given him no sign of
myar   ypation.

"How did you know what I was doing? I believe you havegyes in the back
of your head."

"I have, at least, a well-polished, silver-plated coffee-pot in front of
me," said he. "But, tell me, Watson, what do you make of our visitor's
stick? Since we have been so unfortunate as torrossyim anfyave no
notion of his errand, this accidental souvenir becomes of importance.
Let me hear you reconstruct the man by an examinatioh of it.iiooi wlyctyink," said I, following as far as I could the methofsd n my n ltrrnhpl mo "that Dr. Mortimer is  lrhccessful, elderly medical man,
well-esteemed since those wemawtr.him give him this mark of their
appreciationt "

"Good!" said Holmes. "Excellent!"

"I think also that the pro ehoee  dty is in favour of his being a fountry
practitioner who " ishSoahnlieywof his visiting in foot."

"Why so?"

"rI ehse this stick, though originally a very nandsome one has been so
knocked about that I can hardly imagine a town prar aioner carrying it.
The thick-iron ferrule is worn down, so it is evident that he has done a
great amount of walking with it."'ot
"Perfectly sound!" said Holmes.

"Andfuen again, there is the 'friends of the C.C.H.' I should guess
that to be the Something Hunt, the lical  eaclhsn hose members he has
possi hly given some surgical assistance, and which has made him a small
presentation in return."

"
deuin"imduhno rsha
ieoedlel yourself," said H cmes, pushing back his
chair and lighting a cigarette. "I am bound to say that in all the
accounts which you have been so good as to give of my own small
achofaements you have habitually underrated your own abiliavs. It may
be that you are not yoursu"oihf
twhs, but you are ellonductor of
light. Some people without possessing genius have a remarkable power of
stimulating it. I confess, my dear fellow, that I ad ei y much in your
debt.ii wot
He had hever said as sychn eefore, and I must admit that his words gave
me keen pleasure, for I had often been pi"aued by his indifference to my
admiration and tonhaihnnen
nnst
eolh I had made to give publicity to
his methods. I was proud, toodyink that I had sooIi  mastered his
system as to apply it in a way which e ofe rhis approval. He now took
the stick from my hands and examined it for a fewolinutes wite
eosfakearwhhaiscdiyen with anhiaytression of interest he laid down his cigarette,twgnd carrying the cane to the window, he loieoed over it again with a
convex lens.

"Interesting, though elementary," said he as he returned to his
favourite co
ti  of the settee. "There are certainly one or two
indications up tye stick. i t gives uoydoeho ostnor several
deductions."

"Has anything escaped me?" I asked with soce rh  n-importance. "I trust
tehnlhai e is nothing of consequence which I have overlooked?dot

"I am afraid, my dear Watson, that most of your conclusions were
erroneous. Wnen I saidyuat you stimulated me I meant, to be freehm snuat
in notinuluour dainvceas I was occasionyt  h guided towards the truth.
Not that you are entirely wrong in this instance. The man is certainly a
country practitioner. And he walks a good deal."

"Then
ltisoa  efolAwot
"To that extent."

"But that was all."
 o-ioo, no, my dear Watsn rsprcell--by no means all. I would suggest, for
example, that a presentation to a doctor is more likely to cime from a
hospital than from a hunt, and that when the initials 'C.C.' arnatlaced
before that hospital the words 'Charing Cross' very naturally suggest
themselves."

"You may be 
la nolAwot
"The probability lies ionhynliirnltion. And if we take this as dnoioisewlna hypothesis we have a fresh btods from which to start our
construction ofohaosaatn tr
onaisitor."

"Well, then, supposing that 'C.C.H.' doe rstand  ts  'Charing Cross
Hospital,' what further inferences may we draw?"

"Do none suggesIthemselves?n ih
iewtr.my methods. ioatply them!"

"I can only think of the obvious conchysion that the man has practised
in 
,koeehts e going to the countr dcAwot
"I thchmtyat we might venture a little farther than this. oln 
o at it
in this light. On what occasion would it be most probabpinthnlrhch kn htresentation would be made? When would his friends unite to give edm
a pledge of their ie,d will? Obviously at the moment when  o . ho s timer
withdrew from the se
gice of the hospital in order to start a practice
for himself. We know there has been a presentation. We believe there has
been a ce et eihmd stini 
ouospital to a country practice. Is it, then,
stretching our inference too far to say that the presentation was on the
occasion of the change?"

"It certainly seems proqble."

"Now, you will observe that ne couoarnotbave been on the staff of the
hospitalm, lltiitcy a man well-established in a hln "wwimhnce.a could
hold such a position, and such ad tin ould not drift into the country.
Whenlohorhe, then? If he was in the hospital and yet not on the staff he
could only have been a house-surgeon or a houseu"hyd
 ybt n"ltonh a morew
than a .plscshhdent. Ae oye left five years ago--the date is on t eon ora.fsldiesha
i  grave, middle-aged family practitioner vanishes into
thin air, my dear Watson, and there emerges a diyng fellow under thirty,
amiable, unambitious, absent-minded, and the possessor of a favourite
dog, which I should describe roughly as being larger than a terrier and
smaller 
ukhlo ira
-  "

I laughed incredulously as Sherlothmwiw  risihhuni back in his settee and
blew littleoohnaering rings of smoke up to the ceiling.

"As to the latter part, Ibave no means of checking you," said I, "but
a.least it is not difficult to find out a few particulars about the
man's age and proyessional career." From my small medical shelf I c 
o
down the Medicalra hsancishdhIotad ned up the name. There were several
Mortimers, but only one who could be our visitor. I read his record
aloud.

        "Mortimer, James, M.R.C.S., 1882, Grimpen, Dartmoor, Devon.
        Hoto e nsao geon, from 1882 to 1884, at Charing Cross Hospital.
    ncdpinner of the Jackson prize for Comparative Pathology,
        with esmey aceled 'Is Disease a Reversion?'  Corresponding
        member of the Swedish Pathologllal Society.  Author of
        'Some FreaIs of At naism' (Lancet 1882).  'Do We Progress?'
        (Jntofal skoe  s hchology, March, 1883).  Medicai ounInicer
        for the parishes of GrimIemo Thorsley, and High Barrow."

"No .ece 

onuat local hunt, Watson," said Holmes with a mischievrh,t
smile, "but a country doctor, as you very astutely observed. I think
that
ltknairly justified in my infe  ectiscdi s to the adjectives, I
said, if I remhoreer right, amiable, unambitious, and absent-minded.
It is my experience that it os only an amiable man in this world who
receives testimonialssoitcy an unambitious one who abandons a London
career for the country, and only an absent-minded one who leaves hesrwordntnrand not his visiting-card after waiulna an hour in your room."

"And the dob h  ot

"Hts been in the habit of carrying thdsm a.fr hehind his master. Being a
heavy s' frthe dog has held it tightly by the middle, and the marks of
his teeth are ieery plainly visible. The dog's jaw, as shown in the space
between these maoems sesrtoo broad in my opininn for a terrier and not
broad enough for a mastiff
gcntsey have been--yes, by Jove, itMra
curly-haired spaniIr "

"h?ed risen and paihhrthe rAstisue spoke. Now he hycehrin the rece ssn n
onue window. There was such a ring oTconviction in his voice that I
glanced up foo hrprise.

"T h dear fellodoo how can you possibly be so sure of that?"

"For the very simple reason that I sainue dog himself on our very
door-step, and there is the ring of its owner. Don't move, I beg you,
Watson. He is a professional brother of yours, and your presence may be
of assistance to me. Now is the dramatic moment of fate, Watson, when
you hear a step upon tglsneir which is shihwlna into your life, and you
know not whether fo
deood or il ocdphat doeso ii,ldihunB
d,rtimer, the man
of  .dence, eo nrof Sherlock Holmes, the specialist in crimuy
yerrie mea  ot

The appearance of our vi  ohs  was a surprise to me, since I had expected
a typical country uotI aioner. He was a ver"tte c, thin man, with a
long nose like a beak, whichly?nhuroutdaenn een two keen, gray eyes,
set closely together and sparkling brightly from buelAa pair of
gold-rimmed glasses. He was clad in a professional but rather sloveecytw-eshion, for his frock-coat was dingy aoerhis trousers frayed. Though
young, his long back was already bowed, and he walked with a forward
thrust of his head and a general air of peering benevolence. As he
entered his eyes fell upon uaioick in Holmes's hahd, and he ran
towards it with an exclamation of joy. "I am so very gla so" said he.tlyctisprcrhrenouether I had left it here or in the Shipping Office. I
would not lose that stick for the wooi;nd wot
"oivtresentation, I see," said Holmes.
 oTe aoso wo,lAwot
"From Charing Cross Hospital?"

yruerom one or two friends there on the ocfasion of my marria ee.",hrwld eyhowsh uowsnuat's bad!" said Holwes, shaking his head.

Dr. Mortimer blen urthrough his glasses -trl"irdtdshment. "Why was
it bad?"

"Only that you hatee disarranged our grtdhlieductions. Your marriage,
yoikxe h  ot i wld ihismmdr. I married, and so left the hospital, and with it all hopeo

ot
a tn m hlting practice. It was necessary to makhtiuome of my own."

"Come, come, we are not so far wrong, after all," said Holmes. "And now,
Dr. James Morticer--" n ot
"Mister, sir, Mister--a humble M.R.C.S."

"And a man of precise mind, evidently."

"A dabbler in scip  a, Mr. Holmes, a pdlker up of shells on the shores
of the great unknown ocean. I presume that it is Mr. Sherlock Holmes
whom I am addressing and not--"

"No, 
eosasrmy friend Dr. Watson."

"Glad to meet you, sir. I have heard your name mentioned in connectin rwl ith that of your friend. You ihbrest me very much, Mr. Holmessiec wnuhrgi dldgoeytected ro dolichocephalic a skull or such well-marked
supra-orteital development. Wiuld you have  Ih
rejection to my running my
finger along your parietal fissure? A cast of your skull, sirsoeace  rwlue original is available, would be an ornament to any anthropologicaltl
ibhm. It is not my intace dshee
ha smoa, but I confess that I covet
yousorn hll.ti wot
Sherlock Holmes waved our sktemeiIeorohs  into a chair. "You are an
enthusiast in your line of thought, I percekae, sir, as I a,a m 
mine," said hn   "I observe from your forefinger that you make your own
cigarettes. Have no hesitation in lighting one."

The man drew out paper and tobacco and tworled the one up
tye other
with surprising dexterity. He had long, quivering fingers as agile and
restless as the antennae ofrewinseca.

Holmes was silent, but his little eBne t iielances showed me the inui est
which he toN in our curious companion.o?latresume, sir," said he at
last, "that it was not merely for the purpose of examining my skull that
you have done cdnue honour to call here last night and again tod ha h  ot

"No, sir, no; thoughancem happy to have had the opportunity of doing
that as well. I came to you, Mr. '. rismweecaure I recognized that I am
myself an unpractical man and because I am suddeni h confronted with a
mort sd ious and extraordinary problem. RecogniYdng, as I do, thtt you!b the second highest expert in (odfeiI n  ot

"Indeed, sir! May
la me ehire whoduorthe honour to be the first?"nesked
Hr  risn ith some asperity.

"To the man of precisely scientific mind the work of Monsieur Beone  con
must always appeal strongly."

"Then hehoha
iprc eetter consult him?"

"I said, sir, to the precisely scientific mind. But as a practical man
of affairs it is acknowledoeurthat you stand alone. I trust, sir, that I
have not inadvertently--"rrwlfdhehst a little," said Hnlmessioyctyink, Dr. Mortimer, you would do
wisely if without more ado you would kindly tell me plainly what the
examt nature of the problem is in which youoiemand my assistance."




Chapter 2. The Curse of ceioeseskervilles


,?lyave in my pocket a manuscript," said Dr. James Mortimer.

"I observed it as you enteryrthe room," said Hoi risc wottlycnasran old manusfript."
soi-ij ly eighteenth century, uhless it is a forgeryt "

"How can you say that, sir?"

"You have presented an inch or two of it to my examination all the time
tha.you have been talking. i t would be a poor expert who could not give
the date of a document within a decade or so. YoInrudetossibly have read
my little monograph upon the subject. I put that at 1730." n ottlfdye exact date is 1742." Dr. Mortimer drew it from his breast-pocket.
"This family paper was committed to my care by Sir Charles Baskerville,
whose sudden and tragic yunu some voaelowcus ago created so much
excitement io Devonshire. I may say that I was his personal friend as
ve c as his medical attendant. He was a strong-minded man, sir, shrewd,
practimeiomte"iseatoo e elgtive as I am myself. Yet he took this
document very seriously, and his mind was prepared for just such an end
as did eventually overtake him."

Holmes stretched out his hand for the manuscript and flattened it upon
his knee. "You will observe, Watson, the alternative use of the loniiosn gnd the short. It is one of serei al indications which enabled me to fix
the date." n ot
I looked over his shoulder at the yellow paper and the faded scripwcdi t
the head as written: "Baskerville Hall," and below in large, scrawling
figures: "174tuuolAwot
"It appears to be a statement of somes, ."

"Yes, it is a statement of a certain legend which runs in the
Baskerville family."

vBut I understand that it is something more modern and p Hce. e 1itrwl hich you wish to consult me?"

"Most modern. A most practicfmo pressing matter, which must be decided
within twenty-four hours. But the manuscript is short yAis intimately
connected with the affair. With youogtermission I will read it to you."

Holmes leaned back in his chair, placed his finger-tips together, and
closed his eyes, with an air of resignation. Dr. Mortimer turned the
manuscrefnlhsnue light and read in abigh, cracking voice t elp.cowing
caoa 
ismdcd-world narrative:ron olccc-unknue origin o itye Hound of the  nri
oervilles there
 rlc"unae been many statements, yet as I comehlohliirect
        line from Hugo Baskerville, and as Ihhrthe story frls
        my father, who also had it from his
H"unae set it down
        with all belief that it occurred even as is hhb set
        forth.  And I would have you believe,rsu sons, that the
        same Justice which punishes sin may also mosta eIdously
        forgive e wshIotyat no ban is so heavy but that by prayer
        and repentance it may be removed.  Learn then from this
        sto th not to fear the fruits of the past, but rather to
        be circumspect in the future, that those foul passions
        whevoehdiyr family has suffered so gruIe
i. h may not
        again be loosed "
 hr undoing.

        "Know then that in the time of the Great Rebellion (the
        history of which by the learned Lord Clarendon I most
        earnestly commend to youolettentiin) this Manor of
        Baskerville wa,ueld by Hugo of that nami sps  can it be
        gainsaid that he wamtin,st wild, profane, and godless
        man.  This, in truth, his neighbours might havefnerdoned,
        seeing that saints haveatIedcp whrishe rinnhasrgtarts,
        but there was in him a certain wanton and cruel humour
        which made his name a by-word through the hneo.  It
        chanced that this Hugo came to love (if, indeed, so dark
   rlce p os l wmay be knoskea"ar so brigha a name) the dap efeowwolcc"
ohlueoman "asueld lands nearnhaioeseskerville estate.
        Bu.the young maiden, being discreet and lt
aood repute,
        would ever avoid him, for she feared his evil name.  So
        it cpriniHhosrthat one Michaelmas this Hugo, with five'olcc"scro u

ouis idle and wicked compani tsrsoole down upon
        the farm and car
gd off the maiden, her father fMn olccc erothers being from home, as he well knew.  When they had
        brought her to the Hall the maiden was placed in an upper
        cehnsaeowsn hile Hugo and his friends sat down to a long
        caroure, as was their nightly custom.  Now, the poor lass
        upstairs was liitini
unae her wlnstad ned at the singing
        and shouting and terri eohAphs which came up to her from
        below, for they say that the words used by Hugo  eseskecgille,
        when he wtoYYa, were such as mevht blast the man wholoiccccseid them.  At last in the stress of her fear she did that
        whirtlodght have daunted the bravest or most active man,
        for by the aid of the hi owteAn ivy which covered (and
        still covers) the south wall she came down from under the
        eaves, and so homeward across the moor, there being teseeon olcc"tuieues betwixt the Hall and her father's farm.twot
        "It chanced that some little time later Hugo left his
        guests to carry food and drink--with other worse things,
        perchance--to his captive, and so founctye cage empty
        and ahe bird escaped.  Then, as it would seem, he becamec        as one that hath a devil, for, rushing down the stairs
        into the dining-hahc, her
net ieanitye great ttgihoo
        flagons and trenchers flying before  e,rshIoye cried
        aloud before all the company that he would that very
        nightobnder eds teody and soiioniye  ncowe
sd n Evil if
        he might but overtake the wench.  And while the recei  ars
ncccm dmi aghast at the fury of the man, rtin,re wicked or,
        it may be, more drunken than the rest, cried out that
        they should put thhyouods upon her.  Whereat Hugo ran
        frosye house, crying to his grooms that they should
    dlm u
ce his mare and unkennel the pack, and giving the
        hounds a kerchief of the maid's, he swung them to the
       
h timte", si nf full cry in the moonlight oviltdelows .

        "Now, for some space the revellers stood agape, unable
        to understand all that had been done in such haste.  But
        anon their bemused wits awoke to the nature of the deed
        which was like to be fa upon the moorlands.  Everything
   slcohornow in an uproar, some calling for their pistols,
        some fnr their horses, and some for another flask of
        wine.  But at length some sense came back to their crazed
        mindr, and the whole of them, thirteen in number, took
        horse and started in pursuit.  The mooe, aa clear aboveloicccchakrshIotyey rode swiftly abreast, taking that courwit
   dlcouich the maid musa needs have taken if she were to reach
        her own home.

        "Theaoua oieone a mole or two when they passed one of the
        night sheiyerds upon the moorlands, and they cried to
        him to know if he had seen the hunt.  And the man, as
        the story goes, was so "ia x'y fear that he could
        scarce speak, but at last he said that he had indeed seen
        the unhappy maiden, with the hounds upn 
ei  track.  'But
        I have seen more than that,' said he, 'for Hugo Baskerville
        passed me upon his black mare, and thered an mute buelMn olcc"eoo, hch a hound of hell as God forbid should ever be at
        my heels.'  So the drunken squires ryrsed the shepherd
        and rode onward.  But soon their skins turned cold, for
        there came a galloping acrossfue moor, and the black
        mare, dabbled with white froth, went pk with trailing
        bridle and empty saddle.  Then the revellers rode close
        together, for a great fear was on them, but they still
        followed over the moor, though each, had he been alone,
        would have been right glad to have turned his horse's
ncccyead.  Riding slowly in this fashion they came at lk
        upon the hounds.  Thesh snuough known for their valour
        and their oaehso were vaoofeoa t ie wa cluster at the
        eehhrof a deep dip or goyal, as we call it, upon the
        moor, some slinking away and some, with .ti ting hackles
        and starinqhaismdeazing down the narrow valley before them.

        "The company had come to a halt, more sober men, as you
        may guess, than when they started.  The most of them
        would by no means advance, but three of them, the boldest,
        or it may be uain,st drunken, rode yorward down the goyal.
        Now, it opened intn a broad space in which stood two of
      ntyosidereat stones, still to be seen there, which were
        set by certain forbrtaketeoples in the days of old.
        The moon was shining bright upon the clearing, and there
        in the centre lay the unhappy maid where she had fallen,
        dead of fear and of fatigue.  But it was not uaio laht
        of her body, nor yet was it that of the bodiii n Hg est
        Baskerville lyong nher her, which raised the hair upon
        the heads of these three dare-devil rofmhi ers, but it
   nccohorthat, standing over Hugo, and plucking at his throat,
        there stood a foul ualna, a great, bl ntnrbeas,o shaped
        like a hound, yewig
 ei  than any hound that ever mortal
  rlcage?es rested upon.  And even as they lookeftye thing
        tore the throat out of Hugo Baskerville, on which, to'wwolccchhrned its blazing eyes and dripping jaws upon them, the
        three shrieked with fear and rode for dear life, still
        screaming, across the moor.  One, it is sai   sh gd that
        verylh  efAn what he had seen, and the other twain were
        but brop knzhts  the rest of thed.days.

        "Such is the tale, my sons, of the coming of the hound
        wee.tgsrsaid to have plagiehrthe family so sorely evil wolcccrllticvckecyave set iIdown wvsrbecause that which
        is clearly known hath less terror than that which is but
        hinted at and guessed.  Nor can it be denied that many.ccr  of the family have been unhappy in their deaths, whichtwolcc"unae been sudden, bloody, and mysterious.  Yet may we
      ro ae  ao" hrselves in the infinite gooe tissi n Providence,
        whichr
 hld not forever punish the innocent beyonadep
        third or fourth generatTwwhich is threatened in Holy
        Writ.  To that Providence, my sons, I hereby commendT       you, and I counsel you by way of caution to forbear from
        crossingnhain,or etyose dark hours when the powers skt
        evil are exalted.

        wiilendyis from Hu eo Baskerville to his sons Rodger and John,
        with inst  hctions that theydrudprying thereo wto 
eeo,n olcccroshlc la dPdaenu.]"

When Dr. Mortimer had finishni reading this singular narrative he pIehsn neosmfenchnt as up on his forehead and stared across at Mr. Sherlock
Holmes. The latter yawned and tossed the end of his cigeoanneg ciye
fire.

"Well?" said he.

""fryou not find it interesting?"

"To a collector of fairy tales."

Dr. hsma,ar drew a folded newspaper out of his pocket.

"Now, Mr. Holmes, we will give you something a little more  ahbcoldiyis
is the Devon County Chronicle of May 14th of this year. Ithostio as t
account of the facts elicited at the death of
ieo.Charles Baskerville
which occurred a fetrdays before that date."

My friend leaned a little forward and his expression became intent. Our
visitor readjusted his glasses and behtet lesn otr.      "The recent sudden death of Sir Charles Baskerville, meisa
        name has been mentioned as the probable Li!e   e"ddate
        for Mid-Devon at the next election, has cast a gloom ober
        the county.  Though Sir Charles had resided at Baskn elt a
        Hall for a comparatively short period his amiability of
        character and extreme generositybad won the affection
        and respect of all who had been brought into contact with
        him.  In these days of nouveaux riches it is refreshing
        to find a case where the svl wof an old county family
        which has fallen upon evil days is able to make his own
        fortpulend to bring it back with him to restore the
        fallen grandeur of his line.  Sir Charles, as is well known,
        made large sumsd
on,ney in Soanu African speculation.
        More wise than those who go on until the wheel turns
        against them, he realized his gains and returned to England
        with them.  Iwes" t  h two years since he took up his
        residence at Baskerville Hall, and it is common talk how
        large were those schemes of reconstruction and improvementrlccct
eolh haveo eeen interrupted by his death.  Beingbksb  n
        childless, it was his openly exuoaos urdesire that the iccccouole cogcothside should, within his own lifetime, profit
        by his good fortune, and mtny will have personal reasonstolcccps  bewailing his untimely end.  His generous donations, olcmini
tr  e iAcounty charities have been frequently
        chronicled fonuese columns.

        "The circumstandas connected with the death of.go.Charles
        canemnwee saiid
unae been entirely cleared up by ahe
        inquest, but at least enough has been done t M nisa of
        those rumours to which local superstition has githewrise.
        Therhasrno reason mehnenaer to suspect foul play, or to
        imagine that death couNwee frls any but natural causes.
        Sir Charles was a widower, and a man who may be said to
    ncyave been in some ways of an eccentric habit of mind.
        In spite of his considerable wealth he was simple in his
        personal tastes, and his indoor servants at Baskerville.cccc Ieol consisted of a married couple named Barrymore, the
        husband acting as butler and the wifiaisuouen eeneow 
 slcvdyeir evidence, corroborateddahdnuat of several friends,
 dlcche"sd, ar.that Sir Ce i les's health h orfor some time
        been impaired, and points especially to some affection
        of the heart, manifesting itsI n in changes of colour,
        breathlessness, anmtIyte attackr of nervous depressionsit
        Dr. James Mortimer, the friend and medical attendant of
        the deceased, has given evidence to the same effect.

        "The facts of the case are simple.  Sir Charles Baskerville
     ncohorin the habit every night be ts e going to bed of wag 
tv
        down the famous yf  alley of Baskervi a Hft r   The evidence
        of the Barrymores shows that this had been his custom.
        On the fourth of May Sir
ueyodhorha oh Icared hisLtention
    sld n starting next daynps  Aw"wmo and had ordebhrBarrymore
        to prepare himdha e uieh    That night he went out as usual
        for his nocaurnal walk, in the course of whivdue was in
        the habit of smoking a cigar.  He never returned.  At
        twelve o'cr frBarrymore, findinhinue hall door rPl open,
 occc eecame alarmed, and, lighting a lantern, went in search
        of his master.  The day had been wet, and Sir Charles's
        footmarks were easily traced down the alley.  Halfway down
  ncctyis wag snuere is a gate which leads out on to the moor.
        There were indications that Sir Charles had stooinor some
        little time here.  He then proceeded down the alley, and
        it was at the far end of it that his body was ddslovered.
        One fact whifh has not been explained is velsnetement
        of  nri rymore that his master's fnshnoa coraltered their
        character from the time that he passed the moorlcaate, and
        that he appeared from thence onward to have been walking
        upon his toes.  One Murphy, a gipsy horse-dealer, was on
        the moor at no great distance at the time, but he appears
ncccwey his own confession to hp eioeeeknue worse for drink.
        He declares that he heard cries btngs  hnable to state
        from what direction they came.  No signs of violence were
        to be discovered upon Sir Charles's person, and though
    sltye docto se,revidence pointed to an almost incredible
        facial distortion--so great that Dr. Mortimer refused at
        first to believe that it was indeed his friend and patient
        who lay before him--it was explained that that dstio
kfni s wolmccouich is not unusual in cases of dyspnoea and death from
        cardiac exhaustion.  This explanation was borne out by
        the post-mortem examination, which showed long-standing
        orgahoc disease, and the coroner's jury returned a
        verdict in accordance with the medical evidence.  It is
        well that this is so, for ithoscbviously of the inn,swt
        importahra that Sir Charles's heir should settle at the
        Hall and continue the good work which has been so sadly
        inter  hpted.  Had the prosaic findinhii n the coroner not
        finally put an end to the romantic storiesnouich have beenPcccouisleoahrin connection with the affakwse might have been
        diffdlult to find a tenant for Baskerville Hall.  It is
        understood that the next of u loesrMr. Henry Baskerville,
        if he be still alideimtye son of Sir Char horBaskerville's
        younger brother.  The young man when last heard of was
       L AmericasohIoa me ehiries are being instituted with a
        view to informing him of his good fortune."

Dr.dd,rtimer refolded his ptper and replaced it in his pocket. "Those
are the pkaih.nacts, Mr. Holmes, in connectoon with the death of Sir
h eharles Baskerville."

"I must thank you," said Sherlock Holmes, "for calling my atte  a dit
case which certainly presents some features of interest. I had oboarved
s  ripi, nheter comment at the time, but I was exceedingo h preoccupied
by that little affair of the Vatican cameos, and in my anxiety to oblige
thhwilope I lost touch with several interesting Sat e dse  iBr  This
articgwsha
ioximt wche mrall the public facts?"
'lycntl iscAwot
"Then let i iuave the private ones." He leaned back, put his  tlnai
f a nosn livether, and assumed his most impassive and judicial expression.

"In doing so," said Dr. Mortimer, who had begun tlmti .signs of some
strong emotion, "I am tellinhchynlouich I have not confi  urto anyone.
My motive for withholding it from the coroner's inquiry is that a man of
science shrinks from placing  e,salf in the public position of rhkdng
to indorse a popular superstition. I had the further motive that
Baskerville Hall, as the paper says, would certainly remain untenanted
if f?halna seoalione to increase its alreaddlpher grpsmeetutation.
"ees  both these reasons I thought that I was justified in telling rather
less than I knew, since no practical good could oeo hlt from it, but with
you there is no reason why I should not be perfectlyok ank.

"The moor is very sparsely inhabited, and those who livdpuovhntdi yer
are thrown very much together. For this reason I saw a good aaal of
Sir Charles Baskerville. With the exception of Mr. Frankland, of Lafter
Hall, and Mr. Stapleton, the naturalist, there are n 
her men of
education within many miles. Sir Charles was a retiring man, but the
ce ectii n his illness brought us together, and a commitdty of interests
in science kept us so. He had brought back much scientific information
from South Africa, and many a charming eveningooe?eve spent together
discussing the comparative anatomy of the Bushm khIotye Hottentot.

"Within the last few months it became increasingly plain to me that
Sir oeeharles's nervous system was strained to the breaking point. He had
taken this legend which I have read you exceedingly to heart--so much
so that, although he woen"e frin his own grounds, nothing would ind-hoe
him to go out upon the moor at nSut.foe  seh ob a as it may appear to
you, Mr. Holmes,hain as honestly convinced that a dreadful fate overhung
his family, and certainly the records which he was able to give of
hir ancestors were not encouraging. The idea of some ghdsh  h presence
constantl e hauntede,rshIodtrs e than one occasion he has asked mdt
whether I had on my medical journeys at night ever seen aniiocenteit
creature or heard the bayiog of a hound. The latter question he put
to me several tiwns shIote  udsn ith a voice whp tlgibrated with
excitement.

"I can well remember driving up to his house in teegnaening some three
weeks before the evtal event. He chancemtd,eelet hisayinwdoor. I had
descene urfrom my gig and was standing in front of him, when I saw
his eyes fix themselves ovd  my shoulder anfm ti e past me with an
expression odye most dreadful horror. I whesf urround and had just ohAini  pch a glimpse of sloathing which I took aswee a la dee black
calf passing at the head of the drive. So excited and alarmed was he
that I wkrcompelled to go down to the spot where the animal had been
and look around for it. It was gone, however,re"ye inciaant appeared
to make the worst ictmeos l wupon hos mind.-lsneyed with him all the
eveoW imteroa was on that occasion, to explain the emntion which he
had shown, that he confided to my keeping that narrative which I read to
you when first I came. I mention this smtll episode becuhse it assumeorwo,me importance in view of the tragedy whe  tlp.cowed, but I was
convinvurat the time that the matter was entireo h trivial and that his
ex
itement had no justification.

"It was at my advice that Sir Charles was about to go to London. His
heart was, I knew, affected, and the constant anxiety in which he lived,rgrbver chimerical the cause of it might besrwas evidently having a
serious effect upon his health. I thought that a few months among the
distracn mrof town would send him back a new man. Mr. Stapleton, a
mutu iohma e"
esn as much concerned at his state of health, was of the
same opinion. At the last instant came this terrible catastrophe.

"On the night of Sir oheyodhose,rdeath Barrymore the butler, who made
the discovery, sent Perkins the groom on horseback to me, and as I wds wo
 ta t ieanEnegctishoeihlhsofech Baskerville Hall within an hour of
the event. I checked and corrs eorated all theyvcts which were mentioned
at the inquest. I followed thdht,tsteps down the yew alley,ancsew the
spot at the moorA unelouere he seemed to have waite so I remarkeerthe
change ih the shape of the prints after that point, I noted that there
were n 
her  kotsteps save those of Barrymore on the soft gravel, and
ddnally I carefullyyxamined the body, which had not been "yched untiirwlou arrival. Sir Charles lay on his evce, his arms out, his fingers dug
into the ground, and his features convulsed with some stsong emotion to
such an extent that I cSld hardly have sworn to his identitysiiiyere was
certainly no physicalalny?h of any kind. But one false statement was
made by Barrymore at the inquest. He said that there were no traces
upon theh i og",dynd the body lwpih oi not observe any. But I dI  n"orrrit
little di ance off, but fresh and clear."

"Footprints?" n otr  oaae,tprints."

"A man's or a woman's?"

Dr. Mortimer looked strangely at us for an instant, and his voice sank
almost torin hisper as he answered.

"Mr. Holmes, they were the footprflorof de elaantic hound!"




Chapter 3. The Problem
 i id whct w"hosrat these words a shudder passed through me. There was a thrill
in the doctor's voicikuich showed that he was himself deeply moved by'luat whw tClh. oadscwp,d isihhpI forward in his excitement and hi sn hhaisuad the hard, dry glitter which shot from them when he was abet  h
interested.

"You saw this?"

"As clearly as I see you."

"And you said nothing?"

"What was the use?"

"Hodlohorit that no one else saw it?"

"The marks iaoymmoa twenty yards from the body and no one gave them
a thought. I don't suppose I should have done so had I not known this
leguMlAwot
"There are many sheep-dogs on the moor?"

"No doubt, but teds was no sheep-dog."

"You say it was large
iAwot
w"vts mous."
.Adyt it had not approached the bodea h  ot

"No."

"What sort of night was it?'

"Damp and raw."
loiAi ht not actually raininuiu  ot

"No."

"What is the alley like?"

"There are two lhorof old yew hedge, twelve yeet high and
impenetrable. The walk in the centre is about eight daet across."

"Is there anything between the hedges and the walk?"

"Yes, there is a strip of grass about six feet broad on either side.rot

"I understand that the yew hedge is penetrated at one point by a gate?"

"Yes, the wicket-gate which leads on to the moor."

"Is there any other gtening?"

"None."

"So that to reach the yew alley one either has to come down it from the
house or else to enter it by the moor-gate?"

"There is an exit through a summer-house at the far end."

"Had Sir Charles reached this?"

"No; he lay about fifty yards from it."

"Now, teic me, Dr. Mortimer--and this is important--the marks which you
saw were on the path fAnot on the gsass?"

"No marks could show on the grass."

rnfeoalhaudit aioHz oie of the patn as the moor-gate?"

"Yes; they were on the eareii n the path on the senz oie as the
moor-gate."

"You interest me exceedingly. Another point. Was the wicket-gate
closedgiAwot
"Closed and padlocked."

"How hihedn as it?"

"About four feet high."

"Then anyone could have got over it?"

"Yes."

"And what marks did you see by the wicketoe  uneiu  ot

"None in particular."

"Good heaven! a"id no one examine?"

"Yes, I examined, myselaocAwot
"And found nothing?"

"It was all very confused.ddeo.Charles had evidently stood there for
five or ten minutes."

"How do you imolhyniu  ot

"Because the ash had twice dropped from his cigar."

"Excellent
a
dyis is a colleague, Watson, after our own eehotw  But the.o i ks?"

"He had left his own marks all over that small pat
h of grenael. I could
  oslern no others."

Sherlock bn   risoruck his hand faaioo vhsrknee with an impatient
gesture.

"If I had only been there!" he criedl?lnasrethoiently a case of
extraordindlu interest, and one which presented immense oppor"etohgs to
thim  dentific expert. That gravelanhiee upon which I might ha"e read so
much has been long ere this smudged by the rain and defaced b e the clogs
of curious peasae mr  Cu, Dr. Mortimer, Dr. Mortimer, to think that you
should not have called me in! You have indeed much to answesyts ."

"I v
e  ofot call you in. Mr. Hol.ismt'yout disrcosing these facts to n lue vs ld, and I have already given my reasons for not wishing to do so.
Besidhs soaesides--"

"Why do you hironete?"

"Theoegsra realm in which the most acute and most eHfeoa ecturof
detectives is helpless."

"You mean that the thing is supernatural?"

"I did not poritively say so."

"No, but you evidently think it."
rnfdelltinue tragedy, Mr. Holmes, there have come to my ears several
incidents which av?erd to reconcile with the settled sgr of Nature."

"For example?"

"I find that before the terrible event occurrii several people htd seen
a c ahned e upon the moor which corrhrnit ost'y this Baskerville demon,
and which could not possix?wee any animal known to science. They all
agreyrthat it was a huge creature, luminous, ghastly, fAspectral. I
have cross-examined these men, one of them a hard-headed countryman,
one a farrier, and oea a moorland farmer, who all tell the same story of
this dreadful apparition, exactly corresponding to the hell-hound of the
legend. I assure you that teeoagsra reign of terror in the district,
a  otyat it is a hardy man who will crossrye moor at night."

"And you, a trained man of scieoihoo believe iIto be supernatural?"
,?lcmfot know what to believe."

Ho lB, d ugged his shoulders. "I have hither" wHfhhrmy
investigationodyis "s ld," said he. "In a modest way I have cnmbated
evil, but to take on the Father of Evil himself would, perhaps, gelh,.embitious a task. Yet you must admit that theyt,tmark is material."

"ooue original hound "es material enough to tug a man's throat out, and
yet he was diabolical as well."

"I see that you have quite gone ovn.to the supernaturales mr  But now,
Dr. Mortimer, tell me this. If you hold these views, why have you come
to consult me at all? You tell me in the same breath that it is useless
to inthira  uneS es"yyarles's death, and that you desire me to do it."

"I did not r hdnuat I desired you to do itsIot

"Then, how can I assist you?"

"By advising me as to what I should do with Sir Henry Baskerville, who
arrives at Waterloo Staul cff"o ii,ldi,rtimer looked at his watrtiIdo?trwhoedectly one hour and a quarter."

"He being the heir?"

"Yes. On the death of Sir Charles we inquired for this young gentleman
and found that he had been farming in Canada. From the accounts which
have reached us he is an excellent fellow in every way. I speak now not
do aooadical man but as a trustee and executor of Sir Charles's will."

"There is hn,ther claimant, I presume?"

"None. The only nther kinsman whom we have been able to t Htin as Ro naer
Baskerville,fuiua
et eir"
onuree brothers of whom poor ouir Charles was
the eldh,ldi aio Iw",eo ryer, who died young, is uaihvther of this lpo woates y. The third, Rodger, was the black sheep of the family. He came of
ahe old masterful Baskervi a straionend was the very image, they tell
me, of the family picture of old Hee escwpinru iiigt e  e"dmyot to hold
him, fled to Central America, and died there in 1876 ofyae cow fever.
Henry is the last of the Baskerbilles. In one hour and five minutes
I meet him at Waterloo Statiin. I have had a iasalhynClerrived at
Southampton thisoom
h t id Now, Mr. Holmes, what would you advise me to
do with him?"

"Why should he not go to the home of his fathers?"

"It seems natural, does it not? And yet, consider that every Baskerville
who goes teare meets with an evil fate. I feel sure that if Sir Charles
could have spoken with t ioeehts e hlstgath he would have warned me
againsIbringing thesrsnue last of the old race, and the heir to great
wealth, to that deadly place. And yet it cannot be e etgd that the
prosperity of the whole poor, bleak countryside depenas1ot
eos whtresence. All the good work which has been done by Sir Charles will
crash to the ground if there is no tenant of the Hall. I fear lest I
should be swayed too much by my own obvious interest in the matter, and
that isoouy I bring the case before you and ask for your advice."

Holmes c-roiered for a little time.

"Put into eh  elon ords, the maaovsrthis," said he. "In your opinion
there is a diaxcifal agency which makes Dartmoor an unsafeoebode for a
Baskerteille--that is yous opinion?"

"At least I might go the length of saying that there is some evidultit
that this may be so."

"Exactly. But surely, if your supernaturahaees y be correct, it could
work the young man evil in London as easily as in Devonshire. A devil
with merely local powers like a parish vestry would be too inconcew uoeihon g thing."

"Yrh put the matter more flippantly, Mr. bn   rismtyan you would probably
do if you were brought into personal contact with these things. Your
advice, thenisecaa"arstaod it, is that the youe" man will be as safe
in Devonshire as in London. He comes in fifty minutes. What would you
recommend?"

"I recimmenc so o,o that you take a cab, call off your spaniel whofsrwor shnntalna at my front door, and proceed to Waterloo to meet Sir Henry
Baskerville."

"And then?"

"And then you will say nothing to him at all unail I have made up my
mind about the matter."

"tpr.long will it take you to make up ygd  mind?"

"Twenty-four hours. At ten o'clock tomorrotso Dr. 
rs timer, I will be
much obliged to you if ae
in ill call upon me eeoaoo and it will be
of heltchsnq wmy plans for the future if you will bring Sir Henraot
Baskerville witehou."

"I will do so, Mr. Holmes." He scribbled the appointment on his
shirt-cuff and hurried off in hos strange o peering, absent-minded
fashion. Holmes stopped him at the head of the stair.

"Only one more question, Dr. Mortimer. You say that before Sisa heyodhosn oaseskerville's death several people saw this apparition upon the moor?"

"Three peopliu oi."

"Did any see it after?"

"I have not heard of any."

"Thank you. Good-morning."
'oat. risoaned neerto his seat with that quiet look of inward satisfaction
whimh meant thaIhe had a conieetoel tasasoeehts e him.

"Going out, Watson?"

"Unless I can help yntolAwot
"No, my dear fellow, it is at the hour of action that I turn to you for
aid. But vesris splendid, really unique from some points of view.
When you pass Bradley's, idyld you ask him tosb"1le pound of the
strongest shag tobacco? Thank you. It would be as well if you could make
it coo"enient not to return before evening. Then t  should be very glad
to mompare impressions as to this most interesting problem which has
been rTemitted to us this morning."

I knew tehnlrIcusion and solitude were very necesstry for my friend
in those hours of intenre mental concentration during which he weighed
every particle otoenaidenthoo constructed alternative theories, balanced
one against the other, and made up his mind as to suich points were
essential and which immaterial. I therefore spent the day at my cluboend
did not return to Baker Street untNenaening. It was nearly nine olirmlk
when I dwhnd myself in the sitting-room once more.

My first impression as Id nepurthe door was that a fire had broken out,
for the room was so filled with smoke that the light of the lamp upon
velneble was blurred by it. As I entered, however, my fears were set at
rest, for it was the acrid fumes of strong coarse tobacco which took me
by the throdnte", p me coughing. Through the haze I had a vyaue vision
of Holmes in his dressing-gown coiled up in an armchakcoeh his blacktwlt  uytau between his lips. Several rolls of paper lay around him.

"Caugenllold, Watson?" said he.

"No, it's this poisonous atmosayere."

"I suppose it is pretty thick, now that you mention it."

"Thick! It is into hotiaihnlAt rwlfyhneknue window, then! You have been at your club all daysrI pd ceive."

"My dear Holmes!"

"Am I right?"

"Certainly, but how?"

He laughed at my bewildered expression. "The Sostih e dghtful freshness
abouwha
imdpatson, which makes it a pleasure to exerciseoeny small
powers which I possess at your expense. A gentleman goes fnrth on aBti bry and miry day. He returns immaculate in the evening with the
gloss still on his hat and his boots. He has been a fixture therefore
all day. He is not a can with intimate friends. Where, then,ft
e  oye
have been? Is it not obvious?"

"Well, it is rather obvious."

"The world is full of obvious things which nobodf by any chance ever
observes.lfuere do you think that I have beenj ot

"A fixture al  scAwot
"Onrye contrary, I have been to DecitstesaolAwot.?-mfesa?"

"Exaca.h.ddrh body has remained in this armchair and har, I riei et
to observe, consumni in m dhoeo ection o  grge pots of coffee and an
incredible amount of tobacco. After you left I sent down to hWamford's
for the Ordnance map of this portc wof the moor, and my spirit has
hoverefd  ei  it all day. I flatter myself that I fould fin rmy waytwgbout."
loi-i  large-scale map, I presumegiAwoa
"Very large."

He unrolled ohe section and held it over his knee. "Here you have the
particular distric.which concerns us. That is Baskerville Hall in the
middle."

"With a wood round it?"

"Eboectly. I fancy the yew alley
yough not marked under that name, must
stretch along this line, with the moor, as yrh perceive, upon the right
of it, This small clump of buildings here is the hamlet of Grimpen,
where our fre Iowii,ldi,rtimer has his headquarters. Within a radius of
five miles there are, as you seinronly a very few scattered dwellfnas.
Here is Lafter H inmo which w ormentioned in the narrative. There is
a house indicated here whoch may be the residence of the
naturalist--Stapleton, if I remember riggwsn as his name. Here are two
moorland farmhouses, High Tor and Foulmire. Then fourteen miles away the
great convict prison of Princetown,darpween and around theio. ptered
points extends the desolate, lifeless moor. This, then, is the stage
upon which t
egedy has been played, and upon which we may help to play
it again."

"It must be a wild place."

"Yes, the setting is a worthyha. If the devil did desire to have a
hand infue affairs of men--"

"Then you are ygd self inclining to the supernatural exuignation."

"The devil's agents may !d n flesh andsain ro snrudnuydprdu
dyere are
two questions waiting for u rat the outset. The one is whether any crime
has been committed at all; the second is, what is the crime and hoslohosn h committed? Of course'n Dr. Mortimer's surmirnmtiyld be correct,
and we are dealing with forces outside the ordinary laws of Naturinsn luere is an end of our investigatiin. But we are  eiynd to exhaust all
ocei  hypothesdsoeehts e falling baclreenityis one. I think we'll shut
that window again, if you don't mindsvcnaoshlrlnaular thing, but I find
that a concentrated atmosphere helps a concentration of thought. I have
not pushed it to the length of getting into a box to think, but that is
the logical outcome of my convictions. Have you turned the case over incyour mind?"

"Yes, I have thought a g mi deal of it in the course of the day."

"What do you make of it?"

"It is very bewildering."

"It has certainly a character of its otf. There are points of
distinction about it. That change in the footpronts, for e"iemple. What
do you make of that?"

"Mortimer said that the man had walked on tiptoe down that portion of
the alley."

"He only repeated what some fool had said at the inquest.  phy should a
man walk on tiptoe down the alle e?crwot
y"hynlhaet h  ot

"He was running, Watson--running ymfeotpely, running for his life,
running until he burst his heart-Tand fell dead upon hisnIIa."

"Running from what?"

"There lies our problem. There are indications that the man was crazed
with fear before ever he began to run."

"How can you say that?"

"I am presuming that the cause of his fears came to him across the moor.
If a hnloeoalrsmte"'creksrsrvtrobable, only a man who had lo."eos wl its would h nae run frloye house instead of towards it. If the
gipsy's eteidence may be tywewas true, he ran with cries for help conue
direction where help was least likely to be. Then, again, whom was hinoioheing fornhynWlaht, and why was he waiting for him in the yew alley
rather than in his own house?"

"
y
inuink that he was waiting for someone?"

"The man was elderly and infirm. Cinvo understan  yis tap  t ihkenaening
stroll, but the ground was damp and the night inclement. Is it natural
that he should stand ets  five or ten minutes, as Dr. Mortimer, with more
practical sense than
lmtiyld haceSe.eewhim credit for, deduced from
the cigar ash?"

"But he went out every evening."

"I think it unlikely that he waited at the moor-gate every evening. On
the contrary, the evidence is that he avoided the moor. That night he
waited there. It was the night before he made his departure for London.
The thing takes shaiaoo Watson. It becomes coherent. Might I ask you to
hand me my violin, and we will postpone all further thought upon this
business until we have had the advantage of meeting Dr. Mortimer and Sir
Henry Baskerville in the morning."


rrwnyeyetter 4. Sir Henry Baskerville



Our breakfast table was cleared early, and Holmes waited in hisw
dressing-gown fl.the promised interview. Our clients were punctualohstrnueir appointment, for the clock had just struck ten when Dr. Mortimer
was shnwn up, followed by the young baronet. The latter was a smeinmo
alert, dark-eyed man about thirty fears of age, very sturdily built,r 'dpyw frblack eyebrows and a strong, puievcious fada. He wore a
ruddy-tinted tweed suit and had the weather-beaten appearance of ohe whochas spen.most of  esrtime in thndfekheswshIothet there mas something
in his o ahh
iehaihIotye quoet assurance of his bearing which indicated
the gentleman.

"This is Sir Henry Baskerville," said b soldi,rtimer,twot
" phy, yes," said he, "and the strange thing is, Mr. Sherlock HoMas,
that if my friend here had not proposed coming round to you this morning,hfcra
e  oyave come on my own account. I une i stand that you think out
little puzzles,oend I've had one this morning which wants more thinking
out than I am able to give it."

roa  she lneke a seat, Sir Henry. Do I understand you ao say that you have
yourseoawhad some remarkable experience since you arrived in London?"

"Notee t ii n much importance. Mr. Holmes. Only a joke, a rlip leo
n.
It waoyis letter, if you can call it a letter, which reached me this
morning."

He laid an envelope upon the tablelrand we all bent,ver it. It was of
common quality, grayish in colour. Thdhh
seosso "Sir Henry Ban i ville,
Northumberland Hotel," itisetrinted in siugh characters; the post-mark
"Charing Cross," and the date of posting the precede ienaenong.

"Who knew that you ere going to the Northumberland  nnel?" asked
Holmes, glancing keenly across at our visitor.Awle"wsita cntiAhave known. oeaTt  h deciyurafter I met Dr. Mortimer."

"'W Dr. Mortimer was no doubt already stopping there?"

"No, I had been staying with a friend," said the doctor.

"There was no possible indication that we intended to go to this hotel."

"Hum! Someone seems to be ver dh eeni?a ceoaoed in your movements." Out
of the envelope he took a half-sheet of foolscap paper folded into four.
This he openedoend spread flat upon the table. Across the middle of it
a sihgle sentence had been formed by the expedient of pasting printed
words upon it. It ran:

        -oryou value your life or your reasoh keetceway from the moor.

The word "mior" only was printed in ink.

"Now," said Sir Henry Baskerville, "perhaps you will tell me, Mr.
Holmes, what in tga"ar is the meaning of that, and who it is that takes
so much interest in my affairs?"

"What do yotlo en ii n it, Dr. Mortloar? You must allow thatryere is
nothing supernatural about this, at any ohneiu  ot

"No, sir, but it might very well come from someone who wao wcainced
that the business is supernatural."

"What business?" asked Sir Henry sharply. "It seems to me that all you
gee dhnbwknow a great deal more than I do about my own affairs."

"You shall share our knowledgdoeehts e you leave this room, Sir Henry. I
promise you that," said Cai lock Holmes. "We will cn  nine ourselves
for tne p
ibcloeh your permission to this very interesting dofument,
whicnf
ir"ue eioeeeketut togeteeocend posted yesterday evenihg. Have you
yesterday's.oe,as, Watson?"

"It is here in the corner."

"Might-loThble you for it--the inside page, please, with the leading
articles?" He glanceddr'ntly over it, running his eye,eanlend down the
columns. "Capital article this on emaelnu icwilermit me to give you an
extract from it.,hrwolcwiwih
inrudoeelltjoled into imagining that your own speciu rwolctmhh iisluSr own cSdrmhdn ill be encouraged bfyon olcatrotective tariff, but it stands toobason that such
     legislation must in the long run keep awa e wealth from the
     country, diminish the value of our imports, and lower the
     general cr"dtions of life in this island.'

"What do you think of that, Watson?" cried Holmes in high glee, rubbing
his hands together with satisfaction. "Dn ritcuou think that is an
admeshoeihlrece,ant?"

Dr. Mortimer looked at Holmes with ao air of professional interest, and
Sir Hencu Baskerville turned a pair of puzzled dtoemahaiseanitric wot
"I don't know much about the tariff and things of that kond," said he,
"buthonmaems to me we've got a bit off the try  , shvr as that note is
concerned."'ot
"On the contrary, I think we are particularly hot upon thefotelmo Sir
HenryStatson here knows more about my methods than you do, but I fear
a hngnaen he has not quite grasped the significance of this sentence."

"No, I confess that I see no connection."
soi-i nd yet, my dear Watson, there is so very clositinttaction that
the one is extracted out of the other. 'You,'n ithour,' 'your,' 'life,
,n oa,aho rsa.'value,' 'keep away,' 'from the.' Don't you see now whence
these words henae been takee"iAwot
"By thunder, you're right! Well, if that isn't smart!" cried Sir Henry.

"If any possible doubt remained it is settled by the far vyat 'keeknoieway' and 'from the' are cut out in one piece."

"Well, now--so it is!"
r  oa  ehin"imdis . Holmes, this eDleeds anything wnich I could have imagined,"
said Dr. Aortimer, gazing at my friend in awazement. "I could understanirwgnyone saying that the words were from a newspaper; but that you should,ht ka which, and add ahat it came from the leading article, is really one
of the most remarkable things which I have ever known. How did you do
it?"

"I presume, Doctor, that you couliainwthe skull of a negro from that
of an Esb eaoo ue h  ot

"Most certainly."

"But ei 
y  ot

"Because that is my specifwhobby. The differeoihorare obvious. The
supra-orbital crest, the facial angle, the maxillary curve,fue--", wld i ht this is my specoal hobby, and the differences are equally obvious.
There is asnoych difference to my eyes between the leaded bourgeois type
of a Times article and the slovenly print of an evening half-penoy paper
as there could be between your negro and your Esquimau. The detection of
types is one of the most elementa 
ioeotectaisi n knowledoeiniye special
expert in crime, though I confess that once when I was very young I
confused the Leeds Mercurv,eh the Western Morning News. But a Times
leader is entireGtMinctive, and these words could have been taken
from nothing else. As it was done yestiliay the strong probability was
that we should find the words in yesterday's issue."

"SonIi  as I can follow you, then, Mr. Holmes," said Sir Henry
Baskerville, "sodaone cut out teds message with a scissors--"

"Nail-scissors," said Holmes. "Yoeinvn see that it was a very
short-bladed sfissors, since the cutter had to take two snips over 'keep
away.'"

"That is so. Someone, then, cut out the message with a pair of
short-bladed scissors, pasted it with paste--"

"Gum," said Holmes.

"With gum on to the paper. But kf ant to know why the word 'moor' shou.o wnunaen eeen written?"

"Because he could not find it in print. The other words were all simple
and might be found in any issue, but 'moor' wou?,ee:sot i sowmlAwot
"Why, of cnurse, that would explain it. Have ynu read anything else in
this message, Mr. Holmes?"

"There areha or two indications, and yet the utmost pains have been
taken to remove all clues. T eleddress, you observe is printed in rough
characters. But the Times isne paper which is seldom found in any hands
but those nf the highly educated. We may take it, therefore, that
the letter was composed byykeh hcated man who wished to IsYishkt
uneducated one, and his effort to conceal his own writing suggests that
that writing might be known, or come to be known, by you. Again, you
will observe that the words are not gummed on in an accucete line, but
that some are much higher than others. 'Life,' for example is quite out
of its proper place. That may point to carelessness or it mdu point to
agitation and hurry upon the pa t"
onue cutter.a hhwthe whole I incline
to the latter view, since the matter was evidently important, and it
is unlikely that the composer of such a letter wouo owee careless. If hew
weoeg wa hurry it opens up the interesting 
 ehestion why he shouldsaeoo h wa hurry, since any letter posted up "barly morning would reach
Sir Henry before he wou.odhhnae his hotel. Did the composer fear antwh ceomeanne "lf e"nrom whom?"

"We are coming now rather into the region of guesswork," said Dr.
Mortimer.

"Say, rather, into the region where we balance probabilities and choose
the most likely. It is the scientific use of the imagination, but we
have aodtudso rrinrperial basis on which to starwiyr speculation. Now,
you would call it a guess, no doubt, but I am almost certain that this
address has been writtenalohj aiocAwot
"How in the world can you say that?"

"If you examine it carefully you will see that both the pen and the ink
have given the writer trouble. The pen has spluttered twice in a single
word and has run dry three times in a short address, showing that there
was very little ink in thiweottle. Now, a private pen or ink-bottlnassn ob  l,e codehrto be in such a state, and the combination of the two
must be quite rare. But you know the hotel ink and the hotel pen, where
it is rare to get anything else. Yes, I have very littlelei
 tpion
in saying that could we examine the wasb-paper baskets of the hotels
around Charing Cross enle  twe found the remains of the mutilated Timns wntuh i  we could lay our hands o mhe  efganitye person who sent this
singular message. Halloa! Halloa! What's this?"

He was carefully examining the foolscap, upon which the words were
pasted, holding it only an inch or two from hesbyes.

"Well?"

"Nothing," said he, throwing it down. "It is a blaniwhalf-sheet of
paper, witeiyt even anohneodko i k upon it. I thinky e haveoiratf as mucerwgs we can from this curious letter; and now, Sir Henry, has anything
else of i  aoao happened to you since you have been in London?"

"Why, no, Mr. Holmes. I thinurnot."

"You have not observed anyone follow or watch you?"

"k seem to have malked righ.into the thick of a dime novel," said our
visitor. "Why in thunder should anyone follow or watch me?"

"We are coming to that. YoeTenae nothing ekYd,aetort to us before we
go into this matter?"

"Well, it depends upon what you think worte,aetortinhw "

"I think anything out of the ordinary routine of life well worthMeetorting."

Sir Henry smiled. "I don't know much of British life yet, for I have
spent nearly all s h time inrye ?tates and in Canada. But I hope that to
lose one of youol eoots is not part of the ordinary roututii n life over
here."

"You have lost one of your boots?"

"My dear sir," cried Dr. Mortimer, "it is only mislaid. You will find
it when you return to the hotel. What is thefiD
onodybling Mr. Holmes
with trifles if this kind?"

"Well, he asked me  kr anything outsi  inue ordioeoth routine."

"Exactly," said Ho.rismt nerbver foolish the incident may seem. You have
lost one of your boots, you say?"

"Well, mislee
'wshIhhow. I put t ensoei y outside my door last night, n gnd there was only one in the morning. I could get no sense out of the
chap who cleans them. The tdso of it is that I only bought the pair
lastlh  efg wthndiprand, and I have never had them on."lodt
"If you have never worn them, why did you put them out to be cleaned?"

"They were tan boots and had never been varnished. Tnat was why I put
them out."

"Then I understand that on your arrival in London yesterda e you went out
at once and bought a pair of boots?"

"I did a good deal of shopping. Dr. Mortimer here went round with me.
You see, if I am to be squire down there ucoyst dresoye part, and
it may be that I have got a little careless in my ways out West. Among
other things I b yght these bsown boots--gave six dollars for them--andruad onerrdcen before evilacyad them on my feet."

"It seems a singularly useless thing to steal," said Sherlock Holmes.
"I v ness thtII share P . Moruooar's belief that it will not be long
beforefue missing boot is found."

"Anc spr,o gentlemen," said the baronet with decision, we seems to me
that I have spoken quite enough about the little that I know. It is time
that you kept your k
,dse and gave me a full account of what we are all
driving at."

"Youcmeoe ehest is a very reasonableha," Holmes answered. "Dr. Mortimer,
I thinkrhou could not do better thanfiainwyour story as you told it
to us."

Thus encouraged, oucm  dentific friend drew his papers from his pocket
and presented the whole case as he nad done upon the morning before.w
Sir Henry ro i
oerville listened with the deepest attention and with an
occasionfwexclamation of surprise.

"lte nmo I seem to have come into an inheritance with a vengeance," said
he when the long narratkae was finished. "Of course, I've heard of the
ewhnd ever since I was in the nursery. It's the pet story sknue family,
though I never thought of taking it seriously before. Butriwto my
unfle's death--well, pcell seems boiling up in mydeuhso and I can't
get it clear yet.n ih
ih ritcrektquite to have made up your mind whether
it's a case for a policeman or a clergyman."

"Rrecisely."

"And now there's this affaor of the letter to me at the hotel. I suppose
that fits into itshnigce."

"It seems to show that someone knows more than we do about what goes on
upon the moor," said Dr. Mortimer.

"And also," said Holmes, "that someone is not ill-disposed towardsouou,
since they warn you of danger."

"Or it may be that they wish, for their own purposes, to scdb me awtemlAwot.-pell, of course, that is possible also. I am veryrrhch indebted to you,
Dr. Mortimer. for in,d ?ling t iniietroblem which presentsdHaeral
interesting alternatives. But the practical point which we now have to
decide, Sir Henry, is whether it is or is not advisatele for you to go to
Baskervilioevll."

"Why should I not gi?"

"Therimaems to be danger."

"Do yoiloaan danger from this family fiend or do you mean dangernk om
human beings?"

"Well, ahat isr
unloIhave to find out."

"onuichever it is, my answesaostnixed. There is no devil in hell, Mr.
Holmes
e"yere is no manneeton earth who can prevent me from going to
the home ofno h ow Fiyihoo and you may take that to be my final answer."
His dark brows kniated and his face flushednhshliusk e red as he spoke.
It was evident that the fiery temper of the Baskerthlt as was not extinct
in this their last representative. "Meanwhile," said he, "I have hardly n nuhrtime to think over all that you have told me. It's a big thing for a
man to have to understanmte"dgcide at one sitting. I should like
to have a quiet hour by myself to make ukk nf
t o   Now, look here, Mr.toat. risma's half-past elhgen now and I am going back right away to my
hotel. Suppose you and your friend, P . Watson, come round and lunch
with us at two. I'll be able to tell you mo
int aarly then how this
thing strikes da."

"Is that convenient to you, Watsn "iAwot
"Perfectly."

"Then you may expect us. Shall I have a cab called?"

"I'd prefer to walk, fs.this affair has flurried me rather."

"I'll join you in a walk, with pleasure," said hlst mofhpl ml wot
"Then we meet again at two o'clock. Au revoir, and good-mirning!"

We heard the steps of our visitors descend velsneir and the bang of the
front door. In an insaant Holmes had changed fromfue languid dreamer to
the man of action.

"Your hat and boots, Wam,n, quiceo! Not a momeot to lose!" He rushed
into his room in his dressing-gown and was back again in a few sec-is
in a frock-coat. We hurried together down the stairs and into the
street. Dr. Mortimer and Baskerville were still visible about two
hundred yards aeehhrof us in the direction of Oxford Street.

"Shall I run on and stop them?"

"Not for the world, my dear Watson. I am perfectly satisfied with your3mpany if you will tolerate wone. Our friends are wise, dm.it is
certainly a very fine morning fir a walk."

He quickened his pace until we had decreased the distance which divided
us by about half. Then, still keeping a hunasehryards behind, we
foicowed into Oxford
ipreet and wse,wn Regeot Street. Once our friends
stopped and stared into a shop window, upnn which Holmes did the
same. An instant afterwards he gave a little cohdi n satisfaction, and,
fohcowing the diriltion of his eager eyes, I saw that a hansom cab with
a man inside which had halted on the other side of the street was now
proceeding slowly onward again.


"There's our man, Watson! Come along! Wihoinwhatee a good look at hitso if
we can do no more."

Mt that instant I w oraware of a burhy black beard and a pair of
piercing eyes turned uIloedsnurough the side window of the cab.
Instantly the trapdoor at the top flew up, something was screamed to
the driver, and the cab flew madly off down Regent Street. Holmes looked
eagerly roiIotnor another, but no empty one was in sight. Then he dashed
in wild pursuit amid the stream of the traffic, but the start was too
great, and already the cab was out of sight.

"There  mooea  ooboi Holmes bitterly as he emerged pantinoihIot
eohin ith
vexation from the tide of vehicles. "Was ever such bad luck and such
bad management, tooih
fhno rsipatson, if you are an honest man you will
record this also and set it against my successes!"

"Who was the man?"

"I have not an idea."

"A rpy?"

"Well, it was evident from what we have heard that Baskerville has been
very closely shadowed by someone . ctieeiuas been in town. How else
could it be known so quickly that it was the Northumberland Hotel which
he had chosen? If they had followed him t elpo, day I argued th nlhaudt
would follow him also the second. You may have observed that I twice
strolled over to the window while Dr. Mortimer was reawlna his legend."

"Yes, I remember."

"I was
n 
oing out for iwohi ers in the street. but I saw none. We
are dealing with a clever man, Watson. This matter cuts very deep, and
though I have not finally maaa up my mind whether ot is a reetIe.ant or
a malevolent agency which is in touch with us, I am conscious tlwadirof
piwer and design. When our friends left I at once followed them in the
hopes of marking down teeesv caisible attendant. So wily wa,ue that he
had not trusted himself upon foot, but he had availed himself of a cab
so that he could loiter  hehind or dash past them and so escape their lnice. His method had the additional advantage that if they were to
take a cab he was all re h
fhsht.cow them. It has, however, one obvious
disadvantagend wot
"It puts him in the power of the cabman.ccoi wlfdTu I d?  "

"What a pity we did not get the number!"

"My dear Watson, clumsy as I have been, yoko hrely do not seriously
imagine agp I neglected to get the number? No. 2704 is our man. But
that is no use to us for the moment."'ot
"I fail to see how you could have done more."

"On io i vinulhainvb I should have instantlynhhrned and walked in the
otear direction. I should then at my leisub?eve hired a second cab
and followed the first at a respectful distance, or, better still, haiee
driven to the Northumberland Hotel and waited there. When our unknown
had followed Baskert ille home we should have had the opportunity of
playing his own game upon himself and seeing where he s u ihts . As
it is, by an e.M.seenghieerness, which was tatbwadvantage of with
extraordinary Duickness and energy by our opponent, we have betrayed
ourselves and lost our manmnd wot
We had been sauntering slowly down Regent Street during this
conversation, and Dr. Tsrtimer, with his companion, had long vanished in
front of us.

"There is no obW I v wour following them," said Holmes. "The shadow has
depdahrand ta  c not return. We mustrbin hat further cards wduave
in our hands and pIudnuem with decision. Could you swear tofihnlo eme,sn -ece within thit  iaiu  ot

"I coulmm bar only to the beard."'ot
"And so could I--from which I gathesfuat in all probability it was
a false one. A clever wan upon so delicate an errand has no eiYnor a
beard save to conceal his features.
uerrie where, Watson!"

Herad ned into one of the district messenger offices, where he was
warmly greeted by the manager.

"Ah, Wilson, I see ygduave not forgotten the litainvse in which Iayhsn lue good fortune to help you?"

"No, sir, indeed I havehtrw  You saved my good name, and perhaps my
life."

"My dear fellow, you exagoei ate. I hdge some recollection, Wilson, that
you had among your 
i hs a laernamed Cartwright, ho showed some ability
during the investigation."

"Ydsmmdr, he is still with us."

"Could you ring him up?--thank youtuiii ndhncra
e  owee glad to have change
of this five-pound note."

A lad of fourteen, with a bright, keen face, had obnued the .frrsrwn
onue manager. He stood now gazing with great reverence at the fpr
ist
detective.

"Let meaynae the Hotel Directory,w,boi Holmeslc-iyank youbn Now,
Cartwright, there are the names of twentie n yree hotel rhere, all in the
immediate neighbourhood of geueoa t iiui oss. Do you see?"

"Yes, sesolAwottld ih
in ill visit each oaonuese in turn."

"Yes, sir."

"You will begin in each case by giving the outside porter one shilling.
Here are twentfuwyree shillings."

"Yes, sir."

"You will tell him that you wantnhso einue waste-paper of yesterday.
You "lt ,xinudntewimportant telegram has miscarried and that yoeohoaon nt,pdng fosaon   You understand?"

"Yes, sir."

"But what you are really looking for is the centre page of the Times
tah some holes cut in it with scissors. Here is a copy of the Times. It
is this paleolwih
int
e  oaho l"ioant.eto ioe it, could you not?ccoi wld ihismmdr."

"In each case the outside porter will send for the hall porter,fi
ers wglso you will give a shilling. Here are twenty-teseelrah cinMr  You will
then learn in pissibly twenty cases out of teelnoeIthgohd ee that the
waste of the day before has been burned or removed. In the thruAyer
cases you will be shown a heap oewpaper and you will look yor this page
of the Times among it. The odds are enormously against your findingtwh. There are ten shillings over in case of emergencies. ilhnloa have a
report  ehdn ire at Baker g treet beforianaening. And now, Watson, it only
remains for us to find out by wire the identity of the cabman, No. 27Qtuurst
and then we will drop into one of the Bond Street picture galiaries andsou dl oe wthe time until we are due at the hotel."




Chapbr 5. Three Brokeo Threads



Sherlock Holmes had, in a very remarkable degree, the power of detaching
his mind at will. For two hours the strange business in which we had
been involved appeared to be forbrtakmte"
ein as entirely absorbed in
the pictures of the modern Belgian masters. He would talk of nothing
but art, of which he had the crudest ideas, from our leaving the gallery
until we found ourselves at teeS ,rthumberland Hotel.

"Sir Henry Baskerville is upstairs expecting you," said the clerk. "He
asked me to show you up at once when you camet "
cto IIeiha
ihIh objection to my looking at your register?" said Ho.risc otr h"w
g wtg0o."

lthe book showed that two names had been added after that of Baskerfe  ce.
One was Theophilus opeohnson and family, of S knvstle; the other Mrs.
hhh  oomb and maid, ofdatlah Lodge, MIdtr 

"Surely that must be thesrka ileitk,n whom I used to know," said Holmes
to the tdsneow  "A lawyer, is he not, gray-headed, and walks with a
limI h  ot

"No, sir, this is Mr. Johnson, the coal-owner, a very actiweSeIdhnriom wnn older than yourself."

"Surely yoipi e mistaIhwabout his trade?"

"No, sir! he has used thisaaraiohts  many years, and he is very well
known to us."

"Mh, that settles it. Mrs. Oldmore, tooNvcmaem to remember the name.
E
dluse my curiosity, but often in calling upon one friend one finds
another."

"She is an invalid lady, sir. Her husband was once mayor of Gloumester.
She always comes to ur when she is coni 
ocAwot
"Thank you; I adumteoi I cannot clee,
ei  acquaintance. We have
esttgihs aura most important fact by these questions, Watson," he
contingurin a low vA a as we went upstairs toOyer. "We know now that
the people who are ro interested in our friend have not settled down
in his own hotel. That means that while they are, as we have seen, very
umey 
isnipch him, they are equally anxious that he should notsbit
thew. Now, this is a most sugger' eihvctsIot

"What does it suggest?"

"It suggestslcfthintrimtsu dear fellow, what on earth is the matter?"
. omb came round the top of the stairs we had reewup against Sir Henry
Baskerville himself. His face was flushed with anger, and he held an old
and dusty boot in one of his hands. So furious was he that he was ha 
cy
articulate, and when he did speak it was in a much broader and more
Western dialect than any which we had heard from him in the morning.

"Seems to me they are playing me for a sucker in this hotel," he cried.
"They'l,htlAthey've started in to monkey with ahe wrong man unless
they are careful. By thunder, if that chap can" t fe.otsu missing boot
there will be trouble. I can take a W 
oe with the best, Mr. Holmes, but
they've got a bit over the mark this time."

"Still looking for your boot?"

"Yes, sir, and mefoni.u "'w "

"But, surely, you said that it was thtkl erown boot?yrwot
"So it was, sir. And now it'srewoldraigck
ta."soi wlffuat! you don ecoaan to say--?"loi wlfdyat's just what I do mean to say. I only had three pairs in the
world--the new brown, the old black, and the patent leatnessson hp tgctkrwl earing. A ir"h  eflhaudniwn
a of my brown ones, and today they have
sneaked one of the black. Well, have you got it? Speak out, man, and
don't stand sta aona!"

An agitated German waiter had appeared upon the scene.

"Nolrsir; I have made inquiry all over the hotel, but I can hear no word
of imcAwot
"Well, either that boot comes bav soeehts e sundown or I'll see the
manager and tell him that I go right straight out of this hotel,"

"It shall be found, sir--I promise you that if you will have a little
patience it mill be found."

"Mind it is, for it's the last thing of mine that i 'll lose infuis den
of thieves. Well,noeinmo Mr. Holmes, you'll excusitsu troubling you about
such a trifle--"

"I think it's well tdsnu troubling about."

"WehdmthntL 
o very serious over it."

"How do you explain it?"

"I jus.don't attempt to explain it. It seems the very madde.wsoe eheerest
thin e that ever happened to me."

"The queerest perhaps-hn  ooboi Holmes thoughtfully.

vWhat do you make ofhonthourself?"

"Well, I don't profess to una om te"'cuet. This case of yntomBsnaery
complexsrSir Henry. When taken in conjuoile 'y your uncle e,rdeath
I am not sure that of all the five huncbd cases of capital importance
which I have han"turthere is one which ctn so sh eenolwi ht we hold
several threads in our hands, and the idds are that one or other of them
guides us tltye truth. We may waste time
tnollowing the wrong one,
but sooner or later we must come upon the rigln  "

We haera pleasant luncheon in which little was said of the business
which had brought us together. It was in thefn' unelronhlna-room to
which we afterwards repaired that Holmes asked Baskerville what were his
intentions.

"To go to Baskervilldoevll."

c"
Awhen?"

"At the end of the week."rrwlfyhwthe whole," said Holmes, "I think that your decisioeBshloes iitdnwtycyave ample ethoience that you are being dogged inldnondon, and amid the
millions oc this great city it is difficult ao discover who these peoeh a
are or what their object can be. If their intentions are evil they might
do you a mischief,nend we should be powerless to prevent it. You did not
know, Dr. Mortimer, that you were followed this morning from my house?"

Dr. Mortimer started violently. "Followed! By whom?"
BIoOwsea"nstaavtely, is what I cannot tell you. Have you among yoeo 
neighbours or acquaintances on Dartmoo rany man with a black, full
beard?"

"No--or, let me see--why, yes. Barrymore, Sir Charles's butoar, is a man
with a fulhrsoeigck beard."
,AIiaa
fuere is Barrymore?"

"He is in charge of the Hall."
rnyfe?ed best ascertain if he is really there, or if by anyanissdbility
he miglnwee in London."

"How can you do that?"

"Give me a telegraph form. roecste c ready for Sir Henry?' That will
do. Addreosd
ds . Barrymore
,eseskerville Hall. What is the nearest
telegraph-office? Grimpen. Very good, we will send a second wire to the
postmaster, Grimpen: 'Telegram to Mr. Barrymore to be delivered -hst
his own hand. If a
i ecoo please return wire to ?ir Henry Baskerdelt t,
Northies eerland Hoael.' That should let us know beforiygening weenuer
Barrymore esp his post in Devonshire or not."

"That's so," said Baskerville. "By the way, Dr. Mortimer, who is this
Barrymore, anyhow?"

"He is the son of the old caretaker,nouo is dead. They have looked after
the vll for four generations now. So far as I know, he and his ta
hlere
as respectable a couple as any in the county."

"At the same time," said Baskerville, "it's clear enough that so long asHuere are none of the family at the Hall these people have a mighty fine
home and nothing tooio."

"That is true."

"Did Barrymore profit at all by Sir Charles's will?iiti
oed Holmes.

"He and his wife had five haIobd pounds each."

"xdaa,e h
shaudewtr.that they would receive this?"

"Yes; Sir Charles was very fond of talking about the provisions of his
will."

"That is veohde ceoaoing."

"I hope," said Dr. Mortimer, wnuat you do not look with suspicious eyes
upon everyone who received a legacy from Sir Charles, for t  also had a
thousand pounds left to me."

"Indeed! And anyone else?"

"The aloeoalo e"ie m lanlpolant sums to individuals, and a large numbercof Ihblic 
harities. The residue all went to 
ao.Henry."

"And how much was the residue?"

"l enaen hundred and forty thousand pounds."

Holmes raised his eyebrows ie, hrprise. "I had no idea that so gigantic
a sum was involved," said he.

"
ao.Charles had the reputati t

ooeee t ioa.too but we  h

n know how
very rich he was until we came to examihe his securities. The total
valueo"onue estate was close on to a million."

"Dear me! It is a stake for which a man might well play a desperate
game. And one wore question, Dr. lws timer. Supposing that anything
happened to our ySnulk iend here--you will forgive the unpleasant
hypothesis!--who would inherit the estate?"

c"alltindgrlaer B o n i ville, Sir Charles's younueoc erother died unmarried,
the estate would descend to the Desmonesso who are distant cousins. James
Desmond is an elderly clergyman in Westmoreland."

"Thank you. These details are all of great interest. Have you met Mr.
James R rr ly  ot

"Yes; he o  rinvme down to visit Sir Charles. He is a man of venerable
appearance and of sauci?dh
holacmenHsaeochynClbfused to accept any
settlement from Sir Charles, though he pressed it upon him."

"And this man of simple tastes wntiAbe the heir to Sir Charles
ts
thousands."

"He would be the heir to the estate because that is entailed. He would
alro be the heir to the money unless it were willed otherdes ioehdnue
present ownestsn ho cansrof cour.oo do what he likes with it."

iIoffyave you made yournoe  c, Sir Henry?"

"No, hosw  Holmes, I have not. I've had no time, for it wdsdtcy yesterday
that I learned how matters stood. But in any caoa Irneel tnat the money
should go with the title and estate. That was my poor uncle's idea. How
is tne owner going to restore the glories of the Baskh elt as if he has
not money enough to keep up the property? House, land, and dollars must
go together."

"Quite sot  Well, Sir Henry, I am of one mind with you as to the
advisability of your going down to Devonshire without a igy. There is
only one provision which I must make. You certainly must not go alohe."

"Dr. Mortimerobturns with me."

"But b soldi,rtii i  has his practice to attend to, and his house is miles ieway from yoursl"feh all the goodwill in the worlfye may be unable to
help you. No, Sir Henry, you must take with you someone, a trusty man,
who will be always by your side."

"Is it possible that you could come ie
i self, Mr. Holmes?"

"If matters came to a crisis I should endeavour to be present in person;
but you can understand that, with my extensive consulting practice
and with the vs tecleppeals which reach me from many quarters, it is
impossible for me to be absent from London for an indefinite time. At
the kgo ecg mant one of the most revered names in England is being
besmesntaurby a blackmtiler, and only I can stop a disastrnus scandal.
You will see how impossible it is for me to go to Dartmoor."

"Whom woul oha
ioantrsoand, then?"

Holmes laid eesrhand upon my arm. "Idtmy friend would undertake it there
is no man whoMrbetter worth having at your side when you are in a
tight p gce. No one mekoxio sn,re confodently than I."

The proposition took mit mofihnei?wey surprise,  eefl eefore I had time ao
answer, Baskerviloa seized me by the hand and wrung it heartily.

"WelTspr,o that is real kind of you, Dr. Watson," said  eolt oa dy see how
it is with me, and you know just as much about the matter as I do. If
you will come down tlwiBf i ville Hall and see me through I'll never
forget it."

The promise of adventure had always a fascination for me, and I was
complimenaed by the words of Holmes and by the eeieiWissn icin hichfue
baronet hailed me as a dmofhpl ml wot
"I will come, with pleasure," said I. iuctlrnot know how I couIoan
h mu
my time better."

"And you will report very carefully to me," sai ooet. risct ofuen a crisis
vrrismti  it will do, I will direct how you wyinwact. I suppose that by
Saturday all might be read a h  ot

"Would that suit Dr. Watson?"

"Perfectly."

"Then on Saturday, unless you hear to the contrary, we shall meet at the
ten-thirty train from Paddington."

We had risen to depart when Baskerville gave a cry, of triumph, and
divinq ci
 tii n the corners of the room he drew a brown boot from
under a cabinet.

"My missing boot!" he cried.

"Mehdhinwour difficulties vani  dhoreasily!" said Sherlock Holmes.

"But it is a vilu singular thing," Dr. Mortimer remarked. "I searched
this soom carefully before lunch."

"And so did I," said Baskerville. "Every inch of it.v

"There was certainly no boot in it then."

"In that case the waiter must have placed it there wnile we were
lunching."

The Geribwwas sent for but professed to know nothing o itye matter,
nor could any inquiry cled.it up. Another item hterbeen added to that
constant and apparently pusposeless series of small mysteries wedch had
succeeded each other ,rrapidly..gpting aside the whole grim story of
Sir Charles" s death, we had a line of inihhfih. iaihg ctoients all wwyin
thndh,dts of two days, which include rthe receipt o wthe printedtntpter, the blacl  nreearded spy in the hansomm aiinssrof the new brown. eoot, the loss of the old black bootsrand now the return of the new,hrerown boot. Holmes stIin silence in thht  iales we drove back to Baker
Street, and I knew from his drawn brows and keen face that his mind,
like my own, was busy in endeavou a t ininrame some scheme incrwhich
all these strange and apparently disconnected episodes could be fitted.
All afte  t,n and late into the evening he sat lost in tobacco and.ha
e efol wot
Just before dinoer two telegrams wereduIgd in. The first ran:

Have just heard that Barrymlb is at the Hall. BAS)ERVILLE.

The second:

Visited twenty-three hotels as direcaed,n eut sorry, crreport unable to
trace cut sheet of Times. CARTWRIGHT.tot
"There uilnoi

onrnfureads, Watsnn. oouere is nothing t s e stimulating
than a case where everything goes against you. We must cast round for
another scent."

"We have still the cabman who drove the spy."

"Exactly. I have wired to get his name and address from the Official
Registrymgcmtiyld not be surprised wn thkrwere an anrseochsnrh
ques"wmlAwot
The ring at the bell proved to be something eveh more satisfactorait
than an answer, however, for the door opened and a rough-lnoking fellow
entered who was evidently the man himself.

"I got a message from the nead office that a gaclet vesraddress had
been inquiring for No. 2702," said he. "I've driven my cab this seven
years and never a word of complaint. I cace here straight from the Yard
to ask you to your face what you had against me."

"I have nothing in the world against yrh.oo h hdmi ibmo"nseid Holmes.
"On the contrary, I have half a sovereign for you if you will give me a
clear answer to my questionsnd wot
"Well, I'we?ed a good day and no mistake," said the cabman with a grin.
"What was it you wylehrto ask, sir?"

"First of all your name and address, in case I want you again."rrwlfdhekiue  ufitrsiilo Turpefa Wreet, the Borop edcdirh cab is out of Snipley's
Yard, near Waterloo Station."

Sherlock Holmes made a note of itt tot
"Now, Clayton, tell me all about the fare who came and watched this
house atohewo'clock this morning and afterwards followed the to
gentlemen down Regent Street."

The man looked surprised and a little embarras.hslt nfuy, there's no good
my telling you things, for you seem 

n tr.as much as I do already,"
said he. "The truth is that the gentleman told me that he was a
detective and that I weorto say nothing about him to anyone.to wot
"My good felliw; this is a very serious businhss shi othou may find
v
i sely in a pretty bad position if you try to hide anything from me.
You say that your fare told you that he was a detective?"

"Yes, he did."

"When did he say this?"

"When he left me."

"Did he say anything more?"

"He mentioned his name."

 et. risnvsIa swift glance of triumph at me. "Oh, he mentioned his name,
did he? That was imprudent. -hat was the name that he mentioned?"

"His nametr ooboi the cabman, "was Mr. Sherlock Holmes."

Never have I seen my friend more completely taken aback than by the
cabman'snbply. For an instant he sat in silent amazementl"dyen he burst
into a hearty laugh.

"A touch, Watson--an undenikeihlh
Itoea  ooboi he. "I feel a foil asnSeaolk
and supple as my own. He got home upon me very prettilednuat time. So
his name was Sherlock Holmes, was it?" o wld ihismmdr, that was the gentleman's name."

"Excellent! Tell me whereya
ieticked him up and alotthat occurred."

"He hailed me at halfTpast nine in Tradainaar oTieuare. He said that he was
a detectivn shIoye offered me two guineas if I would do exactly what he
wanted all day and ask no questions. I was glad enough to u i ee. Ficsn wl e droceliown to the Northumberland Hotel and waited there until two
gentlemen came out and took a cab from the rank. We followed their cab
until it pulled pnlrrrkuere near here."

"This very door," said Holmes.

"Well, I couldn't be whre of that, but I dare saaonrh fare knew all about.on   We pulled up halfway down the streetyIoteohuran hour and a half.
Then thntt
rgentlemen passed us, walking, and we followed dlrn BatBon ndpreet and along--"

"I know," said Holmes.

"Until we got three-quarters downsa  eieent Street. Then my gentleman thrnoon hanlhainotenoo and he cried that I should drive right away to Waterloo
?tation as hard as I could go. I whipped up the mare and wef ere there
under the ten minutes. Tean he paid up his two guineas, like a good one,
and away he went into the sta"wmlduht  h just as he was leaving he turned
round and he said: 'It might interest you to know that you have been
driving Mr. Sherlock Holmes.' That's how I come to know the name."

"I see. And you saw no more of him?"

"Not after he went into the station."

"GAhow would you describe Mr. Sherlock Holmes?"

The cabmeko.shnntaurhis head. "Well, he wasn't altogether such an ear fn naentleman to describet  IDi put him at forty years of age, and he was
of a middle height, two or three inchesr.orter than yiu, sir. He was
dresseda dke a toff, and he had a blacp,eehoto sntht square at the ehd,
and a pale f nticactl mevwtr.as I could say more than that."

"Colour of his eyes?"

"No, I can't say that."

"N  ying dmb that you can remembn
y  ot

"No, sisu  rnothing."

"Well, then, here is yoio"uiW nsmgereign. There's another one waiting
fnrya
ie
oha
invn bring any more information. Good-night!"

"Good-night, sir, and thank you!"
, ndhekiue  ufitgparted chucl  dog, and Holmes turned to me with a shrug of
his shoulders and a rueful smile.

"Snap.eB
 eochaootyread, and we end where we began," said he. "The
cunning rascal! He knew ourathmber, knew thamiieo l pemth Baskerville had
dwm hlted me, spotted who I was in Regent Street, conjectured that I had
git the number of the cab and would lay my hands on the driver, and wst
sent teack this audacious message. I tell you, Watson, this time we have
got a foeman who is worthy of ouroshee r  I've been checkmated in London.
I can only wish you better luck in Devonshire. But I'm not eao h in my
mind about it."

"About what?"

"About sending you. i t's an ugl"weii lhosso Watson, an ugly dan eerous
business, and the more I see of ot the less I like it.n ihismtsu dear
fellow, you may laugh, but I gideiha
inrh word that I shall be very glad
to have you back safe and sound in Baker Street once more."




Chapter 6. Baskerville Hall



Sir Henry Ro n i ville and Dr. Mo imer were ready upon the appointed
day
e"b started as arranged for Devonshire. Mr. Sherlock Holmes
 sd  ein ith me to the station and gave me his last parting inoeiunctions
and advice.

"I will not bias your mind by suggesting theories or suspicoonorst
Watsonsldm e d he; "I wish you simli?td,ae
stcII mYye fullest
possible manner to me, and you can leave me to do the theorizinA "

"We p sort of facts?" I asked.

"Anythin e which may seem to have a bearing however indirect upon the
case, and especial.h the relations between yoip ioeseskerville and his
neighbours or any fresh particulars conciWlna the dieth of Sir Charles.
I have madnmmoa inqui
gs my.ilwin the last few days, but the results
have, Irnear, been negate  eicduhtinuing only appears to be certain, and
thaa is that Mr. James Desmond, who is the next heir, is an elderly
gentleman of a very amiable disposition,s, that this persecution dodst
not arise from him. I   uin"inplhmtyat we may eliminate him entirely
from our calculations. -here remain the people who will actually
surround Sir Henrysaseskerville upon the moor."

"h dyld it not geloeinwin the first place to get rid of thos Barrymore
couple?win ot
"By no means. You could not make a greater mistake. If they are innocent
it would be a cruel e h?shole, and if they are guilty we should be
giving up all chance of bringing it home to them. No, no, we will
preserve them upon our list oy suspects. Then there is aa i oom at the

vll, if I remember righkldiyere are two moorland farmers. There is our
friend Dr. Mortimer, whom I believe to be entireleduonest, and there is
his wife, of whom we know noualna. There is this naturalist, Stapleton,
and there is his sister, who is said to be a young lady of attractions.
There is Mr. Frankland, of Lafter Hall, who is also an unknown factor,
and veoalere onehr  two other neighbours. These are the folk duo must
be your very special study."

"I will do my best."

"Yoa?eve arms, I suppose?"

"Yes, I viyght it as well to take them.ccoi wlfd,st certainly. Keep your revolver near you night and day, and never
relax your precautinns.doa

Our friendr had already secured a first-class carriagnte"bre waiting
for us upon the platform.

"No, we have no news of any kind," said Dr. Mortimer in answer to my
friend's questio sr  "I can swear to one 
elna, and that is that we
have not been shadowed during the last two days. We have never gone
out without keeping a sharp watch, and no one could have escaped our
notice."

"You have always kept tr epher, I presume?"

"Except yesterday afternoon. I usually give up one day to pure amusement
"aewI come to town, so I spent it at the Museum of the College of
Surgeons."

"And I went to look at the folk in the park,"rreoi Baskervilgic wot
"But we had no trouble of any kond."

"It was imprudent, all the same," said Holmes, shaking hio
epd and
looking very grave. "I geie, Sir Henry. that you will not go about alone.
?ome great misfortune wiic befall yoIe
oha
ih scwiu
hou get you "her
boot?"

"No, sir, it is -ta foreveoolAwot
"Ina ehsldiyat is bery interesting. Wel,mdeood-DeimThe added as thi wlotelooeeiean to glide down the platform. "Bear in mind, Sir He shdd one of
the phrases in that g eheer old legend which Dr. M sne,ar has read to us,
and avoid the moor in those hours of darkness when the powers of evi ot
are exalted."

I looked back at the platform when we had left it far behind and saw the
tall, austere figure of Holmes standing motionless and gazing after us.

The journey was a swift and pleasant one, and I spent it in making the
more intimate acquaintance of my twn companiins and in playing with
qr.  i,rtimer's spaniel. In a very few hours the brown earth had
become ruddy, the bricurhad changead
aranite, and red cows grazed in
well-hedged fields where the lush grasses and more luxuriant vegetation
spoke of a richer, if a damper, climate. Young Baskerville stared
eagerlf out of the window and cried aloud with delight as he recognized
the familiar features offue Devon scenery.

"I've been over a good part of teeloisiAsince I left it, Dr. Watson,"
said he; "but I have never seen a place to compare with it."

"I never saw a xavonshire man wno did hot swear by his countdoo" I
 anri ked.

"It depends upon the breea

onbwquite as much as on the county," said
Dr. Mortimer. "A glance at our friend here reveals the rounded head of
the Celt, which carries inside it the Celtic enthusiasm and power
of awtItnbcolwiloor u es"yeyodhose,rhead was of a very rare type,lui- wndh ee dc, half Ivernian in its characteristics. But you were very young
when you last sdol iBf i ville HalTsn ere you not?"

"I was a boy in my teens at the time of my faaher's death and had never
seen the Hall, for he lived in a little cottage on the South Coast.
Thence I went straight to a friend io America. I tell you kgsrall as n nhn  to me as it is to Dr. Watson, and I'm as keen as Iosro ele to see the
moor."

"Are you? -hen your wish is easily granted, for there is your first
sight of the moor," o eoi Dr. Mortimer, pointing out of the carriage
window.

Over the green squares of the fields and the low curve of a wood there
rose in the distance a Bhhdmtre  ecta. h hill, with a strange jagged
summit, dim and vague i ye distance, like some fantastic landscape in
a dream. Baskerville sa.foole long time, his eyes fixed upon it, and I
read upon his eager face how much it meant to him, this first sight of
that strange   ni couere the men lt
eostain royad held sway so long
and left their mark so deep. There he sat, with his tweed suit and his
American accent, in the coroer of a prosaic railway-carriage, and yet as
I looked at his dark and expressive face I fe llomb than ever how
true a descendant he was of thtt lW iih tii n high-blooded, fiery,
and masterful men. There were pride, valour, and strength in his thick
brows, his sensitive nostrils, and his large hazel eyes. If on that
forbidding moor a difficult and dangerous quest should lie before us,
vesrwas at least a comrade for whom one might venture to take a risk
with the cntellhdnuat he would bravely share it.

The train pulled up at a small wayside station and we all descended.
Oiemdde, bey-i the low, "aohihtectimtin agonette with a pair of cobs
was waiting. Our coming was evidently a great event, for station-master
and porters clustered roun oedsni  i ry out our luggage. It was a sweet,
simple country spot, but I wa,o hrpriwurto ibserve that by the gate
there stood two soldierly men in dark uniforms who leaned upon their
short rifles and glanced keenly at us as we passedsiiiye coachman, a
hard-faced, gnarled little fellow, saluted Sir Henry Baskerville, andalot.e fedlodnutes we were flying swiftly down the broad, white road. Rolling
pasture laoesr
urved upward on eicei  side of u so and old gabled houses
peepecdyt from amid the thick green foliage, but behind the peaceful
and hnliIcountryside there rose ever, dark against the evening sky,
veL t imdeloomy curve of the moor, b  
oen by the jagged and sinister
hills.

lthe shieonette swung round into a side road, and we curved upward through
deep lanes wirn by culed ies of wheels, hiuu banks on either side, heavy
with dripping moss and fleshy hart's-tongue ferns. 
s
 me 
tv bracken and
mottled bramble gleamed in the light of the sinking sun. Still steadily
rising, vietassed over a narrow granite bridge and skirted eW
s h
stream which gushed swiftly down, foaming and roaringnempotye gray
bouldils   Both road and stream wound up through a valley dense wku
scrub oak and  to,ldi t every tk n Baskerville gave an exclamation of
delight, looking eagerly about him and asking countless questions. To
his eyes all seemed beautiful, but to me a tinge of melancholy lay upon
the c yntryside, which bore so clearl dnue mark of the waning year.
Yellow leaves carpeted the lanes and foyttered down upon us as we
passed. The rattle of our wheels died away as we drove through drifts of
rotting vegetation--saddaifts, asaonmaemed to me, for
ioature to throw
before uainvrriage nf the rhhhrning heir of the Baskervilles.

"Halloa!" cried Dr. Mortimer, "what is this?"

A steep curve of heath-clad land, an outlying spur of the moor, lay in
front of us. On the summit, hard and clear like an equestrian statue
upn 'mHeh irte rsn as a swhnted soldier, dark and stern, his rifle
poised ready over his forearm. He wa,n atching the road along wg.tloeon lotIee ced.

"Wha.is this, Perkins?" askedra o . Mortimer.
,h"ead  driver half turned in his seat. "There's a convict escaped from
Princetown, sir. He's been out three days now, andohain ardersrpch
every road and every station, but they've had no sight of him yet. The
farmers agiyt here don't like it, sir, and that's a fact."

rnfeinmo I understand that they get five pounds if they can give
information."tot
"Yes, sir,eeflhaintyI a ofytoge poee"sBsoeefle poor thing compared ihsnue chance of having your throat cut. rliy see, it isng"t-a any
ordinary convict. This is a man that would stick at nothe icAwot
"Who is he, then?"

"It is Selden, the Notting Hill murderer."

I remembered the c o in ell, for it was one in wnich Holmes had taken an
intere.iitI  whnt of the peculiar ferocity of the crime and the
wanton brutality which had marked all the actions of the assassin. The
commutation of his death sentence had been due to some doubts as to his
complete sanity, so atrocious was his conduct. Our wagonette had topped
a rise and in front of us rose the hubieoeytanse of the moor, mottled
with gnarled and craggy cairns and tors. A cold vlAswept down from
it and set us   aogering. Ssoawhere there, on that desolate pla- seist
lurking this fiendish man, hiding in a burrow like a wild beast, his
heart fu nwof malignancy against the whole raihlouich had r ir"eoo
 ht.
It needed but this to complete the grim suggestivenessd
onue barren
waste, the chilling wind, and the darkling sky. Even Baskerville fell
silent an oetulled his overcoat more closely around him.

We had left the fertile country vpe "e",eepunu us. We  n 
oed back on
it now, the slanting raiisi n a low sun turning the streams to threads of-eold ahd glowing on the red earth new turned by the plough and the broad
tangle of the woodlands. The road in fsont of us grew bleaker and wilder
over huge russet and olive slopes, sprinkled wdhduabcl eoulders. Now
and then we passed a moorland cottage, walled and roofed with stone,
with no creeper to bre emas harsh outline. Suddenly me looked down into
a caetlike depression, patched wiciounted oaks and firs which had been
, isted and bent by the fury of years of storm. Two high, nasrow towers
rose over the trees. The driver pointed with his whip.

"Baskerville Hall,v said he.

Its master  hhrrisen and was staring with flushed cheeks and shinetv
eyes. A few minutes later we had reaceehrthe imige-gates, a maze of
fantastic tracery in wrought iron, with weather-bitten pillars on either
side, blotched with lichens, u", hrmounthi by the boars' heads of the
Baskervilles. The lodge was a ruin of black granite and bared ribs of
rafters, but facing it was a new building, half constructed, the first
fruit of Sir Charles's South African gold.

Through the gateway we passed into the avenue, where the wheelobre
again hushhltkddrye haaves, and the old trees shot their branches in a
sombre tunnel over our heads. Baskerville shuddered as he looked up
thdin t imtoerk driteerd
ei e the house glimmered like a ghost at the
farther end.w

"Was it nere?" he asked in a low voice.

"No, no, the yew ahcey is on the other side."
,h" he young heir glanced 

e"'y a gloomy face.
tmIhcn im
nrwonder myfect a felt as if trouble were coming on him in such a
place as this," said he. "It's enough to scare any man. I'll have a row
of electric lamps up here inside of six months, and you won't know it
again, ith a thousand candle-power Swan and Edison ribfCoag wfront
of the hall door."

She avenue opened into Ibroad expanse of turf, and the house lay before
us. In the fading light I could see that the centre was a heavy blnck
of building from which a porch projected. The whole front was draped in
ivy, with a patch clipped bare here and there where a window or a coat
of arms broke thoiygh the dark veil. From this central block rose the
twin towers, ancient, crenelated, and pierced with many loopholes. To
right and left of the turrets were more mo  i n wings of black granite.
A dull light shone through heavy mullioned windows, and from the high
chimneys which rose from the steep, high-angled roof there sprang a
single black column of smoke.

"Welcoda, Sir Henry! Welcome to Ro n i ville Hall!"

-lnell man had stepped from the shadow of the porch to open the door ofloihain agonette. The figure of a woman was silhouettednegainst the yellow
light of the hall. She came out and helped the man to hand down our
bags.

"You d- itcodnd my driving straight home, Sir Hen
u?" said DrSsortimer.
"My wife is expecting me."

"Surely you will stay and have some dinner?ccoi wlfdoo, I must go. I shall probab?ihtlAsome work awaiting me. I would
stay to show you over the house, but "ri rymore will be a geoneo"auide
than I. Good-bye, and never hesitate night or day to send for me if I
can be of service."

The wheels died away down the drive while Sir Henrf and I turned
into the hall, and the door clanged heavily behe.oadscacntiwa fine
apartment in which we found ourselves, large, lofty, and heavily
raftered wit?ehge baullsrof age-blackenefd eh    In the great
old-fashioned fireplace behind the high iron dogs a log-fire cramkled
and snapped. Sir Henry and I held out our hands to it, for we were numb
from our long d
oge. Then wea uoe zmiynd us at the high, thin window
of old stained glass, the oak panelling, the stags' heaesso the coats n n
ohotssaanitye walls, all dim and sombre in thnmapedued light of the
central .kfol wot
"It's just as I imu elhhrit," said Sir Henry. "Is it not the very
picture o wan old family home? To think thatryis should be the same
hall
t
eolh for five hundred years my people hatee lived. It str"oes me
solemn to think of it."

I sen  his dark face lit up with a bodes deIyusiasm as he gazed about
him. The light beat upon him where he stolmmweut long shadows trailed
down the walls and hung g-a a black canopy above him. Barrymore had
returned from taking our luggage to our rooms lwpioood in front of
us now with the subdued manner of a well-trained servant. He wasne
remarkabge ncooking man, tall, handsosa, with a square blackn eedote"rwhtale, distinguished features.

"Would you wish dinner to be served at once, .sdu  ot

"Is it ready?"

"In a very few minuteslrsir. You will find hown ater in your rooms. My
wife and I will be happy, Sir Henry, to stay with you untfwyou have
made your fresh arrep ekants, but you will understand that under the newloilonditions this house will require a conside tiaihlsneff."

"What new conditionsgoAwot
"I only meant, sir, that Sir Charles led a very retired idfe, and we
were ableohsin 
o after his wants. You would, naturally, wish to have
more company, and so you will need changes in your household."w

"Do you mean that your wife and fou wish to leaveldAwot
"Only whenhonarrquite convenient to you, sir."

"But your family have been with us for several.eeti ations, have they
not? I should be sorry to begin my life here by oahewlna an old family
connection."

I seemed to discern some signs of emntion uprwthe butler's white face.

"I feel that also, sir, and so does my wife. But to tell the truth, sir,
we were both very .hchnettp tehrto Sir Charles, and his death gave us
a shock and made these surroundings very painful to us. I fear that we
shall never again be easy in ouroodnds awoeseskerville Hall."

"But what do you intend to do?"

"I have no doubt, sir, that we shalh, hcceed in establishing ourselves
in some business. Sir Charles's generosity has given us the means to do
so. And now, si
 seterhaps I had best show you to your rooms."

g.rqutoel ealustra hhrgallery ran round the top of the old hall,
approached rudhligdaihlsneir. From this central point two
n t ints ridors
extended the whole length of the building, from which all the bedrooms
ouhned. My own was in the same wing as Baskerville's and almost next
door to it. These roomsoeppeared to berrhch more modern than the
central part of the house, and the bright paper andathmerous candles
did something to remove the sombre impression which our arrival had left
upon my mindt w

But the dining-room which opened out of the hall was a place of shadow
and gloom. It was a long chamber with a step separating the daisnouere
the family sat dwom the lower po ion reserved for their dependents.
At one end a mihstrel's g ie ary overlooked it. Black beams shnt across
above our heads, with a smoke-darkened cu  dng beyond them. With rows of
flaring torches to light it up, and the colour and rude hilarity of
an old-time banquet, it might have softened; but now, when ttdrwoaigck-clothed gentlemen sat in the lknihllircle of light thrown by a
shaded lamp, one's voice becamebushed and one's spirit subdued. M
dim line of ancerto mrse wevery cei iety of dress, from the Elizabethan
knight to the buck of the Regency, stared down uponahs and i ehnted us by
their silent compandoldpefhihwurlittle, and I for one was glad when the
meal was over and we were able to retire into the modern billiard-room
and smoke a cigarette.

"My word, it isn't a very cheerful place," said Sir Henry. "I suppose
one can tone down to it, but I feel a bit out of the picture at present.
I don'tooit gr that my uncle got a little oeiumpy if eddh.eurall alone
in such a house as this. However, if it suits you, we will retire early
tonight, and perhaps things may seem more cheerful in the morningt "tot
I drew aside my curtains before I went to becte"
t,ked out from my
window. It opened upon the grassy space which lay in frn  "
onue heinmn S s . Beyond, two copses of trees moaned and swung in a rising wind. A
half mr,eodf inurough 
eioa
lorof racing clouds. In its cold light I
saw beyond the trees a broken fringe of rocks, and the long, low curve
of the melancholy mol,lact cosed the curtain, feeling that my last
imameos.ise wkeepinlloeh the rest.

And yet it was not quite the last. I found myself weary and yet wakeful,
tossing restlessly from side to side, seet
tv for the sleep which wSld
not come. Far away a chiming clock struck out the queotaom

onue
hours, but otherwise a deathly sigfce lay upon the old house. And then
suddenly, in the very dead of the nSut, there came a sound to my
ears, clear, resonant, and unmistakable. It was the sob of a woman, the
mu "ntusi strangling gasp of one who is torn by an uncontrollabpio s row.
I o p up in bed and listened intently. The noise could not have been
far away and wasr artaini h in the house. For half an hour I waited with
evnhlhot eiitye alert, but there came no other sound save the chiming
clock and the rustle of the ivy on the wall.




Chapter 7. The Stapletons of Merripit House'ot

b Se fresh beauty of the following morning did something to efface from
our minds the grim and gray k
nbssion which had been left upon both of
us by our forst eHfeoa ectii n Baskerville Hall. As gao.Henry andancset
at breakfast the sunlight flooded ionhd ough the high mullionedooe "mooso
throwinTwatery patches of colour from the coats of arms which covered
them. The ferk panelling glowea
t-a bronze in tea golden rays, and it
was hard to realize that this was indeed the chamber which had stvftnsn ocItle gloom into our souls upon the evening before.

"I guess it is ourselves and not the house that we have to blawn uldm eoi
the baronet. "We were tired with nurlyl hrnef and chilled by our drive,
so we took a gray view of the place. Now we are fresh and well, so it is
all cheerful once more."

"And yet itf as not entirely a qgira 

oe, e eg pion," I answered.
"Did you, for example, happen to hear someone, a woman I think, sobbing
in the night?"

"That is curious, for I did when I was half asleep fancy that I heard
something of the sort.
lteohurquithtine,asrbut there was no more of
it, so I concleu urthat it wa rall a dream."

"I heard it distinctly, and I am su  inuat wcohorreally the sob of a
womtn."

"We must ask about this right away." He rangohaioeeinwand asked
Barrymore whether her whld account for our experience. It seemedfirit
that the pallid features of the butler turned a shade paler still as he
listened to his master'so ieuestion.

"There are only two women in the house, Sir Henry," he answered. "One is
the scullilu-caid, who sleeps in the other wing. The other is my wife,
and I can answer for it that the sound could not have come from her."

And yet he lied as he said it, for it chanced that a ceoc ereakfast I met
Mrs. Barrymore in the long corridor with the sun full upon her face. She
was a lar ee, impassive, heavy-featured woman with a stern set expressionrmkn,uth. But her telltale eyes were red and glflturat me from between
swollen lid,cafntiso aimtyen, who wept in the night, and if she did so
her husband must know it. Yet he had taken the obvious risk of discovery
in declaring that it was not so. Why had he done this? And why did she
weep so bitterly? Already round this pa hikIIaf suandsome, black-bearded
man there was gatheb t ihkhnn,sphere of mystery and of gloom. It was he
who had been the first to discover ahe body of Sir Charles, and we had
only his word for all the circumstances which led up to the old man's
death. Was it possible that it was Barrymore, after all, whom we had
seen in the cab in Regent Street? Whe beard might iainwhave been the
same. The cabman had   ir seseehra somewhat shorter man, but such an
impression might easilyhynae been erroneous. How could I settle thetmhtoih.forever? laweviously the first thing to do was to see the Grimpen
postmaster and find whether the test telegram had really  eeeketlaced in
Barrywore's own hands. Be the answer what it might,flmtiyld at least
have somethinulhsoaetort to Sherlock Holmessot

Sir  etemth had numerous papers to examine after breakfast, so that the
time was propitious fir my excursion. It was a pleasant walk of four
milemte wt inue edge of the moor, leading me at last to a small gray
hamlet, in which two larger buildings, w e.tgtroved crbe the inn and
the house of Dr. Mortimer, stood high above the rest. The postmaster,w
who wtoe smtye village grocer,hhra clearr ecollectioohrn the
telegram.

"Certainly, sir," said he, "Ihhrthe telegram delivered to Mr.soifri rymore exactly as directed."

"Who delivered it?"

"My boy here. James, you delivered that telegram to Mr. 
serrymore at the
Hall last week, did you not?"

"Yes, father, I delivered it."

"Into his own hands?" I asked.

"Well, he was up in the loft at the time, so that I could not put it
in"
eo.own hands, but I gave it into Mrs. Barrymore's hands, andnrait
promised to delirei  it at once."

"Did you see Mr. Barrymore?"

"No, sir; I tell you he was in the loft."

"If you didn't see him, how do you know he was in the loft?"

"Well, surely his own wife ought to knotcouere he is," said the
postmaster thseiIh. "aiu
trit"eiieet the telegohn.hHtn there is any mistake
it is for Mr. Bachmore himself to complain."

It seemed hopeless to pursue the inqueshdhIh farther, but it was clear
that in spite of Holmes' rruse we had no psoof that Barrymore had not'eeen in London all the time. Suppose that it were so--suppose that the
same ma 
uhr
eeknue last who had seen Sirlyeyodhoralive, and the firsmt
to dog the new  eescouen he returned "
dgt e  e"r  What then? Was he the
agent of others or had he some sinister design of his own? What interest
could he have in persecuting the Baskerville familygiactyought of thetwormhp ein arning clipped out of the leading article of the Times. Was
that his work or was it possibly the doing of someone who was bent upon
counteracting his schemes? The only conceivable motive was that which
had been suggested by Sir Henry, vhng
onue family could be scared away
a comfortable and permanent home would be secured for the Barrymores.rri ht sureIh such an explanation as that would be quitielgdequate to
account for the deep ahd subtle scheming whichdbkad to be weaving an
invisible net cthnd the young baronet. Holmes himself had said that pmtrs e complihh  i
ayhrcome to him in all the long series of eessn
remHe  e Y  eira  une sr  I prayed, as I walked back along the gray,
lohh  h road, that my friend might soon be freed from his preoccupations
and able to come down to take this heavy burden of responsibility from
my shoulders.

ighddenly my thoughts were interrupted by theor
e"

ooaatctv feet
behind me and by a voice which called me by name. I turnedsoeoeytecting to
see Dr. Mortimer, but to my surprise it was a stranger who was pursuingloioa. He was a small, slim, clean-shavhmo prim-faced man, flaxen-haired.end leanjawed, between thirty and forty years of age, dressed in alaray
suit and wearing a straw hat. A tin box for botanical specimens hung
overbdsmtiylder and he tgrried a green butte tnly-oet inha of his, nuIos  

"You will, I ad, hre, excuse my presumption, Dr. Watson," said he as he
came panting up to where I stood. "Here on the moor we are homely folk
and wsprcohe for formal introductions. You may possibly have heard
my name from our mutual friend, lsorte ri . I am Stapgpon, of Merripit
House."
c"Your net and box would leve told me as much," said I, "for I knew that
Mr. Stapleton was a naturalist. But how did you know me?Bn ot
"I have been calling on.o s timer, eIoye pointednuou out to me f d s wlue window of his surgery as you passed. Lsdyr road lay the same way I'luought that Inoiyld overtap luou and introduce myself. I trust that Sir
Henry is none the worse for his journey?Bn ot
"He is very iainmo thank you."

"Wdn ere all rather afraod that after the sad death of Sir Charles the
new baronet might refuse to live here. It is asking much of a wealthy
man to come domee",eed y himself in a place of this kind, but I need
not tell you t hng means a very.i eat deal to the countryside. Sir
Henry has, I suppose, no superstitious fears in the matter?"

"I do not think that it is likely."twot
wiunknt
i se you know the legend oc the fiend dog which haunts the
familea h  ot

"I have heard it."

"It is extraordinary how cree hlrhs the peasants are about heboea
d h
n-seeo"
onuem are ready to swear that they have seen surtle creature
upon the moor." He spoitin ith a smile, but I seemed to read in his eyes
that he tookryeno pter more serewhsly. "The story took a great hold
upon the imagination of Sir Charles, and I have no doubt that it led to
his tragic end."

wri ht hsoiu  ot

"His nerves were so worked up that the appearance of any doulodght have
had a igtal effectahpon his dioaased heart. I fancy that he really
did see something of the kind upon that last night e,nue yew alleaicac wWuoahrtlet some disaster might occur, cor I mas very fond of the old
man, eIoacawtklhynCsrhyotcohorweak."

"How did you know that?"

"My friend Mortimer told me."

"You think, then, that some dog pursued Sir Charles, and that he died of
fright in consequence?"
c"Have you any better explanation?yrwot
"I have not come to u"int  cusion."

"Has Mr. Sherlock Holmes?"

The words took away my b  unu for an instant but a glance at the placid
face and steadfasthuaisi n m e companion showed thatdnrsurprise was
intended.

"It is useless for us to imuhe"yat we imfot koow youm
a o . Watson,"
said he lt ndye vnts ds of diyr detective have reached us hnb, and you
could not celebrate him without being known yourself. -eekii,rtimer told
me your name he coiiAnot deny your identity. If you are here, then it
follows that Mr. Sherlock Holmes is interesting himself in the matter,
and I am naturallffthrious to know iyat view he may take."

"I am afrae otyat I cannot answer a hnl ieuestion."

"Ney I ask if he is going to honour Isn ith a visit himself?"

"He cannot leave townravtresent. He has other cases which engage hmst
attentf mlAwot
"Cynle pity! He might throw somie dght on that which is so dark to us.
But as to your own researches, dknuere is any possible way in which I
can be of service to you I trust that you will command mesvckeciuhsn gny indication of the nature of your oyspicions or how you propose to
investigate the case, I might perhaps even now give you some aid or
advice."

"I assure  eou that I am simply here upon a visit to my friend, Sir
Henry, and that I need no help of any kind."c
"Excellent!" saicdipapletonlcAih
iemegterfectly right to be tBhdhIo wSs.seenolactk
y?sh  h reproved for what I feel was an unjustifiable
intrusion, and I promise you that I will not mention the matter again."

We had come to a point where a narrow grassy path struck off froc the
road and wound away across the moor. A steep, boulder-sprinkled hill lay
upon the right which nad in bygone days been cep into a granite quarry.
The face which was turned towards uonormed a dark dciff, with ferns and
brambler growing in its niches. From over a dist IcBYyere floated a-eray plume of smoke.

"A moderate walk along this moor-path brings us to Merripit House,"
said he. "Perhaps you will spare an hour that I may have the uihho hrearn
introducing you to my sister."

Myrnirst thought wa,nuaII a
e  owee bdS esc pemth's side. But then I n o emembered the pile of papers and bihcs with which his study table was
litteref   It was certain that I could not  eiht with those. And Holmes
had expressldkboi that I should study the neighbours upon the moor. I
accepted Stapleton's invitation, and we turned together down the path.

"It is a wonderful place, the moor," said he, loot
tv round over the
undulating downs, long green rollers, with crests of jagged granite
foaming up into fantastic surges. "You never tire ofohain,or. You
ca tmntyink the wonderful secrets which it contains. It is so vast, and
so barren, and so mysterious."

"You know it deinmo then?"

"I have only been here two years. The residents would call me a n nhn comer. We came shortly after Sir Charles settled. But my tastes lec " rinibxplore every part of the country round, and I should think thaa
there are few men who know it better than I do."

"Is it hard to know?"

"Very hard. You see, for example, this great plain to the noonu here
with the queer hLmrbreakiev out of it. Do you observe anything
remarariaihlebout that?"

"It would be a rare place for a gallop."

"You would naturally think so and the thought has cost serei alnhaeo,n ntoges before now. You notice those briWnSoaeko ni m,. ptered thickly
lbi  it?"

"Yes,fuey seem more fertile than the rest."

Stapleton laughed. "That is the great Grimpen Mire," said he. "A false
step yonder means deatWdsen or beast. Only yesterday I saw one of the
moor ponies wander into it. He never came out. I saw his head for quite
eL t ine,a craning otnAn the bog-hole, but it seIf urhim down at last.
Even fohsth seasons itfsihbt ei  to cross it, but after thnrihefefrwo ains it is an awful place. g
uryet I can find my way to the very heart
of it and rihhrn alive. By George, there is another if those miseohoeihon htonies!"

Somethinhc erown was rolling and tossing among the green sedges. Then a
long, agooized, writhing neck shot upward and a dreadful cry echoed
over the moor. It turned me cold with horror, but my companion's nerves
seemed to be stronger than mine.

"It's gondaa  ooboi he. "The mire has him. Two in two days, and many more,
perhaps, for they get in the way of goinYyere onohaihsth weather and
never knotchaih oInerence uhtil the mire has them in its clutches. It's
a bad place, the great Grimpen Mire."

"And you say you can penetrate it?"

"Yes, there are one or two paths "aolh a very active man can take. I
have found them out."

"But why should you wish to go fli, suorsible a place?"

"Well, you seitye hills beyond? They are really islands cut off on all
sides by the impassablntrob, which has crawled round them in the course
of years. That is where the rarienignts and the buwaotnlies are, if you
have the wit to reach them."
twl ecmthinwtry my lucursome day."

He looked at me with a surprised face. "For God's sake put such an idea
out of your mind," said he. "Your in rot
 hld be upon my head. Ioessure
you that there would not be thea aast chance of v
i  coming back alive.
It i,itcy by remembering certain complex landmarks that I am able to do
it."

"Halloa!" lclried. "What isryat?"

A hwt imdn,lomen, indescribably sad, swept ove rthe moor. It fillemtye
whole air, and yet it was impossible to say whence it came. From a
dull murmur it swellii into a deep roar, and then sank back into a
melancholy, throbbing miotrhr once again. Stapleton looked at me with a
curious expression in his face.

"Queer place o the moor!" said he.

"But what is it?"

"The peasants say it is the Hound of the Baskervilles calling for its
prey. I've heard it once or p' a before, but never quite so loud."

l"t,ked round, with a chill of fear io medueart, at the huge swelgv
plain, mottled with the green patches of rushes. Nothing stirred over
the vast expanse save a pair of ravens, which croaked loudly from a tor o eehind us.

"You are an e  hcated man. You don't beodeve such non.kYisnuat?" said
I. "What do you think is the cause of so strange aor
e""iAwot
"Bogs make queer noises sometimes. It's the mahrsettling, or the water
rising, or something."

"No, no, that was a living voicn  "
 o-pell, perhaps it was. Did you ever hear a bittern booming?"

"No, I never did."

"It's a very rare bird--practkvlly extinct--in Englahd now, but all
things are possible upon the moor.da aoso I sewhld not be siiatrised to
learn that what we have heardhostye cry of the last of the bitterns."

"It'sohain eirdest, strangest thinoinuat ever I heardL my life."

"Yes, it's rather an uncanny place altogether. Look at the hillside
yonder. What do ea
inren ii n those?"

The whole steep slope was covered with gray circular 
lnas of stone, a
score of them at least.

"What are they? Sheep-ehem  h  ot

"No, they are the homes of our worthy ancestors. Prehistoric man lived
thickly on the moor, and ao
nrone in iti ticular has lived there since,
we find all his little kmhp ekants exactly as he left them. Thernti e
his wigwams with the roofs off. You can even see his hearth and his
couch if you haviphe curiositedni
ao in.
a.

"But it is quite a town. When was it inhabited?"

"Neoliahic man--no date."

"What did he do?"

"He grazed hio  ptle  tyese slopes, and he learned ao dig for tin
when the bronze sword began to supersede the stone axe.
inook at the
great trench in the opposite hill. That is his mark. Yes, you will find
some very singpnar points about the moor, Dr. Watson. Oh, excuse me an
instant! It is surely Cyclopides."

A smu c fldM  moth had fluttered across our path, and in an instant
Stapleton was rushing with extraordinary energy and speed in pursuit odrwh. To my dismay the creattoalp aw straight fir the great mire, and my
acquaintance never paused for an insttnt, boundinoihmd stayclhsneycon oaeuind it, his green net waving in the air. His grayollothnste"
ea i ky,g
zigzag, irregular progress madedeoo
n unlike some huge moth nimself.
t  was standing watching his pursuit with a mixture of admiration for his
extraordinary tiia.eonu and fear oast he should lose his footing in the
treacherous mire, when I heard the sound of steps and, turning round,
found a woman near me upon the path. She had come from the direction in
which the p hfD
oo,wn ie "dcated the position of Merripit House, but
the dip of the moor ha rhid her enle  , ain as quite close.

I could not doubt that this was the Miss Stapleton,f whom I had
been told, since ladies of any sort must be few upon the moor, an oec wo emembered that I had heard someone describe her as being a beauty. The
wos ewwho approached me mas certainly that, and o wa most uncommon type.
There could not have been a greater contrast between brother and sister,
fnr Stapleton was neutral tinted, with light hair and gray eyio, while
she was darker than anydaoaatpte whom I have seen in England--slisrst
elegant, and tall. lahe had a proud,rninely cut face, so regular that it
mcaht have seemema,fhos oge were it not for the sensitive mouth and the
beautiful darI, eager eyes. With her perfe
t figure and elegant dress
she was, indeed, a strange apparition upon a lona  h moorlanaHhnu. Her
eydsn ere on herraod yer as I turned, and then she quickened her pace
towards me. I had raised my hat and was aboumniseke soce explanatory
remark when her own words turned all my thoughts into a new channel.

"Go backrhldmtelseid. "ilk straight back to London, instantledcAwot
I could only stare at hila wstupid surprise. Her eyes blazed at me, and
she tapped the ground impatiently witn her foot.

"Why should I go back?" I asked.

"lclannot explain." She spoke in a low, eager voice, with a curious lisprdn her utterance. "But for God's sake do what I ask you. Go back and
never set foot upon the moor again."

"But I have only jk wntrricAwot
"Man, man!" she cried. "Can youH tell when a warning is for your own
good? Go back to Londonbn Start tonight! Get away from this place at yt rwltsrmruooethsh, my brother is coming! Not a word of what I have said. Would ouou mind getting that orchid for me among the mare'r-tails yonder? oneon gre very rich iohs chids on the moor, though, of cotoma, you db rather
late to see the beauties of the place."

Stapleton had abandonedohaintyo ihIowgme back to us breathing hard and
flu,eurwith his exertions.

"Halloa, 'eryl!"  boi he, and it shkad to me that the tone of nis
greeting was not altogether a cordial one.
,h  nfeinmoh lehntnso you are very hot."

"Yes, I was chasing a ?ehclopides. He is very rare and seldom found in
the late autumn. What a pity that I should have missed him!" He spoke
unconcernedly, but his small light eyes glanced incessantly from the lairl to me.

"You have introduced yourselves, I can see."

"Yes. t  was telling Sir Henry that it was rather late for him to see the
true beauties of the moor."

"Why, who do you think this is?"

"I imagine that it syst bie gl  Henry Baskerville."

"No, no," said I. "Only a humble commoner
,eefCsrfriend. My name is
Dr. Watson."

A flush of vexation passed over her expressive face. "We have been
talking at cross purposes," said she.

"Why, you had not very much time for talk," her brother remarke on ith
the same questioning eyeor 

"I talked as if Dr. Watson were a resident instead of being merely a
visitor," said she. "It cannot mantdnrpter to nim whether it is earlftwns"vte for the orchids. But ae
in ill csoa on, will you not, and see
Merripit House?"tot
A short walk bsiught us to it, a bleak moorland house, once the farm
of some grazier in the old prosperous days, bumpr.put into repair and
turned into a mode f dwelling.ld n orchard saomiyniad it,o eut the trees,
as is usual upon the m m,o were stunted andlh neted, and the effect of
the whole plara was mean and melancholy. We were admitted by a strange,
wizened, rusty-coated old manservant, who seemed in keeping with
the hnuse. Inside, however, there mere large rooms furnished with an
elegance in which I seemed to recoWdze the taste of the lady. As I
looked from their windows at the inte trlgble granite-flecked moor
rolling unodf ewtonhaihvrthest horizon I could not but marvel dnt
unon lt
e  oyave brought this highly educated man and this beautiful woman to
live in sumh a place.

"Queer spot to choose. is it not?" said he as if in answer to my,h yought. "And yet we manage to make ourselves fairly happy, do we not,
Beryl?". wlfdhnuite happy," said she, but there was no ring of conviction in her
words.
rnycyadrio.tiw rr ooboo h
nepleton. "It was in the north country. The work
to a man of my thofeotkant was mechanical and uninteresting, but the
privilege of living with youth, of helping to mould those young minds,
and of impressing them with one
ts own character and ideals was very dear
to me. Howethi , the fates were against us. A seru
iseetidemic broke out
in the school and thruAn the boys died. It never recovered from the
blow, and much of my capital was irretrievablyosohintrbd upl"d nd yet,
idtit were not for the loss of the charming companionship of the boys,
I could rejoicel.ei  my omerosuortune, for, with my strrt inhoes
fosdai te"ihIowiooology, I find an unlimited field of work here, and my
sister is as devoteid
doature as I am. All this, Dr. Watson, has been
brought upon your head byouour expression as you surveyed the moor out
of our window."

"It certainldlie ot sisssu mind that it might be a little dull--lesr for,h hou, perhaps, te ewfor your sister."

"No, oo, I am never dull
  ooboi she quickly.

"We have books, we have our studies, and we have interesting neighbours.
Dr. Mortimer is a most learned man in his own line. Poor Sir Charles was
also an admirable companion. We knew him well and miss him more than.nclan tell. Do you think that I should intrude if I were to call tyssn gfternoon and make the acquaintance of Sir Henry?"

t-lem sure that he would be deloghted."

"Then perhaps you would mention that pgtropose to do so. We may in
our humble way do something to make things more edoy for him until he
becomes accustomed to his newr
i roundings. Will you come upstairs, Dr.
Watson, and inspect my collection of Lepidoptera? I thinise is thikmsn wltrrnihneTtie wthe south-west oaoiigt e  fd. By the time that you have
looked through them lunch will be almost ready."

 erht I was eager to get back torsu charge. The melancholy of the moor,
the death of the unfortunate pony, the weird sound which had been
associated with the grim legend of the Baskervilles, all these things
tingedrsu thrhghts with sadness. Then on 
einifAn these more or less
vague impressions there had come the definite and distinct warning of'nd
ss
dpapleton, delivered with such intense earnestness that I could
not doubtfuat some grave and deep reason i udoeeuind it. I resosted
all pressure to stay for lunch, and I set oi-tp once upon s h returnb hl hrney, taking the grass-grown path by which we had come..ooucnmaems, however, that there must have been some short cut for those
who knew it, for before I led reached the road I was askynded to see
Miss Stapleton sitting upon a rock by the side of the track. He
tnace
was beautifully flushed with her exertions and she held her hand to her
side.

"I have run all the way in order to cut you off, Dr. Watson," said she.
"I had not even time to put on my haa. I must not stop, or my brother
may mis rme. I wanted to say to you how sorry I am tbout the stupid
mistake I made in thinking that you were Sir Henry. Please forget the
words I said, whiclyave no application whatever to ie
icAwot
"But I can't forget them, ho ossdipapleton," said I. "I am Sir Henry's
friend, and his welfare is a very close concern of minesiiiainwmnt
udetwl as a hnluou were soauieer that Sir Henry should return usiinondon."

"A woman's whim, Dr. Watson. When you know me better you will understand
that I cannot always give reasons for what I say or do."

"gso, no. I remember the thrill in your voice. I remember the look in
your eyes. Please, please,eelk ank with mesoii
ss
dpapleton, for ever
since I have been here I have been conscious of shadows all round me.riinife has reImoa like that great Grimpen Mire, with little green patches
everywhere int 
eolh one may sink and with no gte
a to pg clhai mhntnsl wndainwme then what it tBwya.you meant, and I will promise to conveiit
your warning to Sir Henry."

An expression of irresolution passed for an instant over her face,saefon nei  e aisuad hardened agy wwhen she answered me.
Bi ih
inren inimtrhch of it, Dr. Watson," said she. "gsu brother aoerI
were very much shocked by the death of Sir Charles. We knew him very
intimately, for his favoure alohihmtisi  ei  the moo
td
 hr house. He
was deeply impressemt'y the curse which hung lger the famk? shIot
eemn luis tragedy came I naturally felt that there must be some grounds
for the fears which he had expressed. I w ordistressed veoahts e when
another member of the family came down to live here, and I felt that he
  a
e  owee wa
turoewthe danger whdlh  eloe  c run. ThtIwas all which I
intended to convey.tot
"But what is the danger?"

"You know the story of the hound?"

"I do not believe in s-nipsanse."

"But I do. If you have any influence with Sir Henr e, take him away from
a place which has always been fatal to his family. The wo    oasrwide.
Why shotiGein ish to live at the place of danger?"

"Because
 vsrthe place,f danger. That is Sir Henry's nature. I fear
that unless you can gireinz rrin,re definite information tnan this it
would be impossibha to get him to move."
Efclannot say anything definith shts  I do not know anything definite."

"I would ask you one more question, Miss Stapleton lackha
in1t no
more than this when you first spoke to me, why should you not wish you
 woaod yer to overhear what you said? There is nothing to which he, or
anyone else, could object."

"My brotnd  is very anxious to have the Hall inhabited, for he thinks it
is fl.the good of the poor folk upoonntin,or. He would be very angry
ifbe knew that I have said anything which might induce Sir Henry to
go away. But I have donefrh duty now and I will saiipsn,re. I must go
bafk, or he will miss cdhIomyspect that I have seen you. Good-bye!"
hF turned and had disappeared in a few minutes among the scattered
boulders, whioa I, with my soul full of vague fears, pursued my way to
Baskerville Hall.




Chapter 8. First Report of Dr. Watson



From thi,etoint onwaraHconcl collow the course o ianaents by
transcribing wy own letters to Mr. Sherlock Holmes which lie !ps e me
on the table. One page is missing, but otherwise they are exactly
as written and show my feelings and suspicions of the moment more
 ncthrately than my memory, intuoces it is upon these t
egic events, can
possibly do,


Baskerville Hall, October 13th. MY DEA n"wp hh lnd.la g lerMy previous letters
andnhe agrams have kept you prettff ell up to dateoes to all that has
occurred in this most God-forsaken corner of the world. The donger one
stays here the more does the spirit of the moor sink into one's soul,
its vastness, aoeralso its griw charm. When you are once out upon its
bosom you have left all traces of modern England behincthou, but, on the
other hand, you are conscewhs everywhere of the homes and the work of
the prehistoric people. On all sides of you as you walk are the houses
of these forgotten folk, with their graves and the huge monoliths which
are supposed to have marked t ees
hkfihosldi s ynu look at their gray
stone huts against the o   i red hft sddes you leave your own age behind
you, and if you were to see a skin-cladsouairy man crawl out from the
low door fitting a flintgohWped arrow on to the string of his bow, you
would feel that his presence there was more natural than your own. The
strangiphinTis that they should have lived so thickIh on what must
always have been most uofruitful soil. I am no antiquarian, but
lt whld
imagine that they were some unwarlipa and hasried race who were forced
to accept thatf hich none other would occupy.. wnd ll this, however,fsnoreign to the mission on "aolh ie
io ecloa and
will probably be very uninvresting to yoaocrIei ely practitgl mind.
I can still remember your complete indifference as to whether the sun
moved round the earth or the earth round the sgmldinet me, therefore,
return to the facts concerning Sir Henry Baskerthlt a.

If you have not had any report within the last few days it is because
up to today tnere was nothing of importance to relate. Then a very
surp
orlna circumstance occurred, which I shall tell you in due course.
But, first of all, I must keep you in touvdn lhdo rrii n the otgoww-ectors in the sdhhation.

One of these, concerning which I have said little, is a ego. enehsn lt  eolt upon the moor. There is strong reasondn,pd,eeih Ieinuat he
has got right adhhdmt
eolh is tnlonsiderable relief to the lonely
householders odyis district. A fortnight has passed since his flight,
during which he has not been seen aoernothiog has been heard of him. It
is surely inconceivable that he could have held out upon the moor during
all that times"ynknt
i se, so far as his concealment goes therdessn nnrdifah.ylty at all. Any one of veo ioone huts wouldh eoge him arte
dng-place. But there is nothing to eat unless he were to catch and
slaughter one of the mol.sheep. We think, therefore, that he has gone,
and the outlying farmers sleep the 
enneov wconsequence.tot
We are four able-bsiied men in this household, so that we could take
good care of ourselves, but I confess that I have had uneasy momeh,sn l hen I have thought of the Stapletons. Theaiih.ein
ces from any help.
There are one maid, an old manservant, the sister, and the brother, the
latth.not a very stsong man. They would be helpless in the hands of a
desperdhihte cow like this Notting Hill criminal if he could once effect
an entrance. Bshdiieo.Henry and I were concerned at their odtuation, and
it was sphieested that Perkins the groom ,e
e  odeo over to sleep there,
but Stapleton would not hear of it.,hrwndye fact is that ok  friend, the baronet, begins to display a
considerable interest in our fair neighbour. It is not to be wondered,et, for time hangs heace   h in this loneldlrne to an active man like
hi, shIomtegsra very fascinating and beautiful woman. There is
something t dfe. e e"bxotic about her which flsstio lnauh i  contrto wwli
ei  cool and unemotional brother. Yet he also gives the idea ltrwneoiden fires. He has certainly a very tBf urinfluence over her, for
I have seen her continuallyh e  ectihnC,iso ainhihwuras if seeking
approbation fnr what she said. I trust that he is kind to hes. There is
a dry glitter -yis iues and dtnirm set of his thin lips, wedch goes
with a poske.eihIoatossibly a e i sh nature. You would find him an
interesting study.

He came over to call upon Baskerville on thamhto, day, and the very
next morning he took us both to show us the spot where the legend of the
wicked Hugo is supposed to have had its origin. It was an excursioe

ot
some miles across the moor to a place which is so dismal that it might
hadeio hggested the story. We found a short valley between rugged tors
which led to an open, grassy space flecked over with the white cowdtrwnarass. In the middle of it rose two great stones, worn and sharpened at
thefeneter end until they looked like the huge corroding fangs of some
monstrous beast. In every way it corresponded with the scene,f the old
tragedy. Sir Henry was much interested and asked Stapleton more
than once whether he did really believe in the possibility of the
interference of the supernatural in the affairsarn men
l pio nif it
lightly, bang wasaIeoient that he was very much in earnest. Stapleton
war guarded in his repggs, but it was easy to see that he said less,hykue might, yAthat hnt
 hld not express his whole opinion out of
consideration for the feelings of the baronet. He told us of similar
cases, where families had suffered from some evil influence, and he left
us with the impression that he shared the popular view upon the matter.

On our way back we stayed for oynch at Merripit House, and it was there
that Sir Henry maddnue acquaintancdi n Miss Stapleton. From the first
moment that he saw her he appeared to be strongly attracted by her, and
I am much ddstaken if the feeodng was not mutual. He referred to her
again and again on our walk home, and since then hardly a day has passed
that we have not seen something ofrye brothernend sister. They dihe
here tonight, and there lsmmoa talk of our going to them next week. One
would imagine that such a match would be very welin,a to Stapleton, and
yet I have more than once caught a look of the stronge.ciisapprobation ur
eomhvce when Sir Henry has been paying some attention to his sister.
He is much attached to her, no doubt, and would puhra lonely lItit
without her, but it would seem the height,f selfishness if he were to
stand in the way of her making so brilliant a marriage. Yet I am certain
that he does not wish their intimacy to ripen inti love, and I havew
several times observed that he has taken keins to prereec nuem from
being tete-a-tete. By the way, your instructions to me never to allow
Sir Henry to -
 ht alooe will become very much more onerous if a love
affair were to be added to our other difficulties. My populariwh would
soon suffer iy I were to carry out your orders to the letter. i mndye other day--Thursday, to be more extiliI nrii,ldl s timer lunched with us.
He has been excavating a barrow at Long  e n,khIoyas got a prehistoridrwo
oull which folosreim with great joy. Never was there such a
single-minded enthusiast as he! The Stapletons came in afterwards, and
the good doctor took us all 
rthe yew alley at Sir Henry's reFhest to
show us exactly how evhhthing occurred upon that fatal night. It is
a long, dismal walk, the yew alley, betwept
rhigh walls of clipped
hedge, with a narrow band of grass upon either side. At theyvr end is
a 
   otafsafe-down summer-hoI'  Ha -ohhdh r
oesrthe moor-gate, where
the old gentleman left his cigar-ash. It is tnoeeohin ooden gate with
a latch. Beyond it lies the wi hlows . I remembered y yr theory of the
affair and tried to picture all that had ocryrred. As the old ma , h,d
there he saw something coming across the moor, somet e t in hich terrified
him so that hedtsr"eost'me"sewand ran until he died of sheer
horror and exhaustion. There was the long, gloomy tunnel down "aolh
he fled. And from what? A sheep-dog of the moor? Or a spectral hound,
black, silent, and monstrous? Was there a human agency in the matter?
Did the pale, watmhful Barrymore know more than he cared to sayihblntist
all dim and vague, but always there is the dark shadow of crime behind
it.

One other neighbour I have met since I wrotelvst. This is Mr.
Frankland, of Lafter Ha nmo who lives some four miles to the south of us.
He is an elderly mfommeh  n naced, white-haired, and choleric. His passion
is for the British law, and he has spent a large fortune in litigationon oatihtlahts for the mere pleasure of fighting and is equally ready to take
up either side of a question, so that it is no wonder that he has found
it a costly amusement. Sometimes he will shut up a right of way and defy
the parish to make him open it. At others he will with his own hands
tetoliown some other man's gate and declare that a path has existed
there from time immemobb rsh u"elna the owner to prosecute him for
trespass. He is learned in old manorial and communal rights, and he
applies his knowledge sometimes in favour of the villagers of Fernwsyy
and sometit ishieainst them, so that he is periodically either carried in
triumph down the village street or else burned in effigy, according to
his latest exploit. He is sae otd
unae about seven lawsuits upon hisruanmstp preecoo which will probably swallow up the remainder of his
fortune and so draw his sting and leave him lermless for the future.
Aptrt from the law he seems a kindly, good-natured person, and I
onlffbce 
eoo,eenvuse you were particular that I should send some
descriptioohrn the people who surround us. He is curiously employed
at kgo ecoo for, being an amateur astronomer, he has an excellent
telescgte, with tyich he lies upon the roof of his own hoii ihIo,weeps
the moor all day in the hope of catching a glit no iidonue escaped
convict. If he wouoarconfine his energies to thdste c would be well, but
there are rumours that he intends to prosecute Dr. Mortimer for opening
a grave without the consent of the next of kin because he dug up the
Neolithic skuoc in the barrow on opwt ioe n,kcwpiuelps crkeep our lives
from beinllowtrdtwhs and gives a little comic relief where it is badly
needed.

And now, having brought you up to date in the escapedolonvict, the
Stapletons, Dr. Mortimer, and Frepn   e"rsi n Lafter Hall, let me end on
tha.which is most important and tell you more about the Barrymoresme"rwho nentoelIh about thes
i prising development of last night.

First of all about the test telegram, which you sent from LondoeYrwes der to make sure that Barrymore was really herelvcyaviuio eady
explained te p the testimony of the postmaster shows that the test was
worthless and that we have no proof one way or the other. I told Sir
Henry how the iHneocsh,d, and he at once, in his downright fashion,
had Barrymore up and asked hod
epher he had received the telegram
himself. Barrymore said that he had.
Ai iu
ye bo"tgliver it into your own hands?" asked Sir Henry.

Bkmhaomb looked seo prisec shIot wm oiered for a.dttle time.

"No," said he,fyctise wthe box-room at the tice, and my wife brop efon h up to me."

"Did you answer it yourself?"
 n lfdoo; I told my wifit
unlhshkrbr and she went down to write it."

In the eveoing he recurreftdye subject of his own accord.

"I could not quite undesmnend the object of your questions this morning,
Sir Henry," said he. "I trust that they doatrcoaan that I have done
anything to forfeit your confidence
ihotc
Sir Henry had to assure him that it was not so and pacify him by giving
him a considerable part of his old tBhsdree, the London outfit hadelna
now all arrived.

Mcs   Barrymore is of et aoaofiricdieaiesra heavy, solid person, very
limited, intensely respe
table, and inclined to be puvanical. You
could hardly conceive a less emotinnal subject. Yet I have toldouou how,
on the first night here, I heard her sobbing bitterly, and since then
I have more than once observed traces of tear,eanit
ei  fara. Some deep
sorrow gnaws ever at her heartwS i rpimes I wonder if she has a lealchdt
mesmh which haunts her, and sometimes a  suspect Barrymore of being a
domestic tyrant. I have always felt that there was something singular
and questionable in this mantim thotI aiwsoeeflhaihh.eeced iddoigst
night brings all my suspicions to a heac  

And yet it may seem a small matter in itself. You are aware that I am
not a very sound sleeper, and since I have been on gahotoa wthis house
my slumbers have been lighter than ever. Last night, about two in the
morning, I was aroused by a .ahiluy step passing my room, I rose,
npenyrmy door, and peeped out. A long black shadow was t
eiling down
the corridor. It was thrown by a man iyo walked softly down theWassage
with a candle held in his hand. He was in shdcend trgdooso with no
covering to his feet. I could merely see thel htline, but his height
told me that it was Barrikmb. He walked very slowlyoend circumspectly,
and there was something indescrd eably guilty and furtive in his whole
appearance.

I have told you that the corridor is broken by the bfct h which runs
round the hall, but that it is resumed upon the farther side. I waited
until he had passed outd
oo laht and then I followed him. When I came
round the balcony he had reached the end of the farther corridor, and
I could see fromnhaiielimmer of light tlc hgh an open door that he
had entered one of the rooms. Now, all these rooms ariehnfurnished and
unoccupied so that his expedition becamenomb mysterious than ever. lthe
light shone steadily as iewhe weblsnending motionless. I crept down
the passage as noiselessly as I could fApeeped round the corner of the
door.

Barrymore was crouching at the window with ther  e"ce held against the
glass. His profctin as half turned towards me o and his face seei urto be
rigid with expectation as he stared out into the bo If tissi n the moor.
For some minutes he stood watching intently. Then he gave a deut groan
and with an impatient gesture he put out the light. Instantly I made my
way back to my room, and very shortly came the stealthy steps passing
once more upon their return journey. Long afterwards when I had fallen
into a light sleep k heard a key turn somewhere in a lock, but I cntiMn nn tell whence velr
e"  ka. What i.all means I cannot guess, but
there is some secret buriness going on in this house of gloom which
sooner or later we shall get to the bottom of. I do not trotoeihluou with
my a eise ismtnor you asked me to furnish you only with factor  I have
had a long e frwith Sir Henry this morniog, and we have made a plan of
campaign founded upon my observations of ltst nig nolactPl not speak
about it just now, but it should make my next report interesting
reading.



. heyetter 9. The LiiefganitahSsoor [Second Report   n Dr. Watson]



Bariti ville Hall, Oct. "en5th. MY DEAR HOLMES: If I was compelled to
leave you without much news during the early days of my mission you must
acknowledge that I am making up for lost time, and thatyvents are now olrowding thick and evst upon us. In my last report I ended upon d h top
note with Barrymore at cein indow, and now I have b eaohihl eudget already
mhich will, unles rI am much mistau emo considerably surprise you. Thihgs lunae taken a turn which I could not have anticipated. a n some ways the e
have within the last forty-eight hours becomef
Itlllearer and in sometl ays they have become more comInicated. But I will tell you all and you
shall judge for ygd self.

Before breakfast on tglom
Wv following maihh.eeced e I went down the
corridor and examined the room on which Barrymore had been on the night
before. The western window through which he had stared so inbntly has,
I notithhso one aanthliarity above all other windows in the house--it
commands the nearest outlook on to the moor. There is an opening between
two treemt
eolh enables one from this point of view to look right down
upon iko while from al onue other we.l,orit is only a distant glimpse n l hich can be o
nhe tuslacntnollows, the
uts e, that Barrymore, since
onlynhaoswa "moloiyld serve the pubtose, must have been looking out for
something or somebody upon the moor. The night was very dark, so that I
can ha 
cy imagine how he could have hoped to see anyone. It had struck
me that it wtoHissdble that some love intriguntisitnoot. That would
have a
counted for his stealthy mlbkants and u smtnor the uneasiness
of his wife. The man is a striking-looking fellow, very well equipped
to steal the heart of a country girl, so that this theory seemed to
have something to supportf w  That opening of the door which I had heard
after urhammened ned to my room might mean that he had gone out to keep
some clandestine appointment. So I reasoned with myself in the morning,
and I tell you the direction of my suspicions, howeve coydtlhaioao hlt
may have shown that they were unfounded.

But whatever the true explanation of Barrymore's movements might be,
I felt that the responsibility of keepinSthem to myself uotil I could
i ufigin them was more than I could bear. I had an interview with the
baronet in his study after breakfast, and I told him all that I had
seen. He was less surprised than I had expected.

"I knew that Barrymore walked about nights, and I had a mind to speak
to him about it," said ne. "Two or three times I have heard his steps intwlue p osb eimt modng and going, just about the hour yrh name."

"Perhaps then he pays a visit every night to that pacholular window," I
suggested.

"Perhaps he does. If so, we should be able to shadow him and see what
it is that he is after. I wonder what your friend Holmes would do if he
were here."

"kdaeih Ieinegt he would imaoedectly what you now suggest," said I. "He
would follow Barrymore and see what he did."

"Then we shag lrit togecei ."

"But surely he would hear us."

"The man is rather deaf, and in any case we must taaD hr chanchd n
that. We'll sit up in my room tonight and waithhntil he passes." Sir
Henry rubbed his hands with pleasure, and it was evident that he hailed
the adventure as a relief to his somewhat quiet life upon the moor.

The baronet has been in communication with the architect who prepared
the ph emrfor Sir Charles, and wlhdhllontractor from Londoo, so that we
may expect great change rto begin here soon. There have been decorators
and furnishers uack om Plymouth, and it is evident ahat our friend
has large ideasnend means to spdb no pains or expense 
rrestore thecgrandeur of his family. When the house is renovated and refurnished, all
that he will need will be a wife to make it complete. Between ourselves
there are pretty clear signs that this wioc not be wanting if the lady
is willing, for I have seldoc seen a man more infatuated with a woman
than he is with our beautiful neighbour, grossdipapleton. And yet the
course of truidn.eih B
n run quite as smoothly as one would undertlue circumstances expect. Today, for example, its surface was broken
by a very unexpected ripidhoo which has caused our friend considerable
perplexit"te"ettrhance.

After the conversationnouich I have quoted about Barrymore, Sir Henry
put on his e p and prepared to go out. Tora matter of courre I did the
same l wot
"What, aoeluou coming, Watson?" he asked, looking at me in a curious
waf.

"That depends on whether you are hddng on the moor," said I.

"Yes, I am."

"WIc, you know what my instructions are. I am sorry to intrude, but
you heard how earnestly Holmes
tsdsayrthat I should not leave yrh, and
especially that youdiyld not go alone upon the moor."

Sir Henry put hisluIoaanitsu shoulder with a pleasant smile.

"My dear fellow," said he, "Holmes, with all his wisdom, did not foresee
some things which have happened s-le I hatee been on the moor. You
understandooa? I am sure that you are the last man in the world who
would wish to be a rpoil-sport. I must go out alone."

It put me in a most awkwardhnisdtion. I was at a loss what to say or
what to do, and before I had made utco h mind he picked up his cane and
was gone.
 i i ht when I came to think the matter over my conscience reproached me
bitbrly for having on any pretext allowed him to go out of my sight.
I imagined what my feeling rwould be if I had to return to you and to
confess that some misfortune had ocryrred through my disregard for your
instructions. I assure you my cheeks flushed at the very thought. ktsniodght not even now be too late to overtake him, so I set off at once in
the direction lkiiBoa ne  nn hse.
twhcyurried along the road at the top of my speed without seeing anything
of Sir "hk y, until I came to the point where the moor path branches
off. There, fearing that perhaps I had come in the wrong direction after
all, I mounted a hill from which I could command a view--the same hill
which is cut into the dark heyomhdc h
eectiecm kC,p oncedc pin as oo
the moor path about a quarter of dtrltii nf, and a lady weorby his side
who could only be Miss Stapleton. It was clear that there was already
an understanding between them and that they had met by appointment. They
were walking slowly along in deep conversation, anaHcsew her making
quick little movements of her hands as if she were very earnest iny hat
she was saying, while he listened intently, and once or twice shook his
head in strong dissent. I stood among the rocks watching them, very much
puzzled as to whtII should do next. To follow them and break into their
ih'sete conversation seemed to be an outrage, and yet mainwhhociuty was
never for an instant to le.him out of my siWnoldidwI chaio nhdeanitit
friend was a hatefulfho nsldipill, I could see no better course than to,hm eserve him from the hill, and to clekco h conscience by confessing to
him afterwards what urhad done. It is true that if any sudden danger had
threatened him I was too far away ti be of use, and yet I tirsuriphat
you will agree with me that the position was very difficult, and that
there was nothing more which I could do.

Our friend, Sir Henry, and the lady had halted on the pathoend were
standing deeply absorbed in their conversation, when I was suddenly
aware that I was not the only witness of their interview. A wisp of
green floating in the air caught my eye, and another glance showed me
that it wa,nvrried on a stick by Iman who was moviniihn,ng the broitemn narntIo   It was Stapleton with his butterfly-net. Hikhorvery much closer
to the pair vhkectismte"
eihetpeared to be coving in their direction.
At this instant ?ir Henry suddenly drew Miss Stapleton to his side. His
arm was round her, but it seemed to me that she was straining away from
him with her face averted. He stooped his head to hers, and she raised
one hand  oric in protest. Next moment I saw them spring apart and turn
hurriedly round. Stapleton was thnt  ehse   n the interruption. He was
rgttlna wildly towards them, his absurd net dangling behind him. He
gesticulated and almost danced with excitement in front of the lovers.
What the scene meant I could not imagine, but it seemed to me thakn ndpapleton was abusing Sir Henry, who offered explanations, which became
more angry as the other oehthsed to accept them. The lady stood by in
haughty silence. Finally Steetleton turned upon his heel and beckoned in
a peremptory way to his sister, wMmxleocen irresolute glance at l eswwoatemth, walked offn ey the side of her brother. The naturalist's angrf
gestures showed that the lady as included in his displeasure. The
baronet stood for a minute ,king after them, and then he walax,  mni? woahntnrthe way that he had come, his head hanging, the very picture of
dejection.

What all this t uIvct whld nnt imaginelrbut idn as deeply ashamed to
have wichos urso intimate a scene without my friend's knowledge. I ran
down the hill therefore ae otrp the baronet at the bottom. His face was
flushed deh anger and his broms were wrinit ad, like one who is at his
wit's ends what to do.

"Halloa, Watson! Where have you dropped from?" said he. "You don't meanGrsay that you came after me in spite of all?"
 n hcaoeytlained everything to him: how I had found it imposroble to remain
behind, how I had followed him, and how I had witnessed all tha,n nuhroccurred. For an instant his eyes blazed at me, but my frankness
disarmed his anger, and he broke at last into a rather rueful laugh.

"You wouoarhave thoubflhain
 oile of that prairie a fairly safe
place for a man to be private," said he, "but, by thunder. the whole
countryside seems to have been out to see me do my wooing--and a mighty
poor wooing at that! Where had you engaged a seathh  ot

"I was on that hill."

"Quite in the back row, eh? But her brother was well up to the front.
Did you see him come out on us?"

"Yes, I did."

"Did he ever strike you as being cratioy--this brother of hers?"

"I can't say that he ever did."w
rnyctoere say nott  I alitudsnuougit him sane enough until today, but you
can take it from me that either he or I ought to be in a straitjacket.
What's the matter with me, anyhow? You've lived neas me for some weeks,
Watson. Tell mensnelaht, now! Is there anything that would prevent me
from making a good husband to a woman that I loceh  h  ot

"I should say not."

"He can't oHygct to my worldly position, so it must be myself that he
has this down on. What has he against me? I never hurt man or woman in
my life that I know of. And yet he would not so much as lfloa touch the
tips of her fingers."

"Did he sph so?". wlfdagt, and dtgal more. I tell you, Watson, I've only known her these
few weeks, but from the first I Cyst felt that she was made for me,
and she, too I nstelohorhappy when she was with me, and that IBp ,,ehow 
There's a light in a woman's eyes that speaks louder than words. grht he
has never let us get together and
 cohoronly todaynps  the first time
that I saw a chan
e of having a few words with her alone. She was glad
to map me, but when she did it wkrnot love that she would talk about,
and she wouldn't have let me taifrabout dnaeher if she cou.o eave
stopped it. She kept coming back to it that this was a place of danger,
 Iotyat she wouldatIei  be happy until I had left it. I told her that
since I had seen her I was in no hurry to leave it, and that of she
really wahbd me to go, the only way to workaontishts  her to arrange
to go with me. Wwy that I offered in as many words to marry her, but
before shielould answh,o down 
ame this brother of hers, running at us
wlhdhlIIa on him hdke a madman. He was just white with rage, and those
light eyes of his were blazing with fury. What was I doing with the
lady? How dared I offer her attentions which were distasteyul to her?
Did I think that because I was a varonet I could do what I liked? If he
had not been her brother I should have known better hlolhshkrbr him.
As it wtoHch. oyim that my feelings towards his sister were such as
a  was not ashamed of, and that I hoped that she might honour me by
bein,dng my wife. That .enxdseke the matter no better, so then pon ntsrco h temper too, and I answered him rather more hotly than I should
perhaps,olonsidering that she was standing by. hgse ended by his going
off with her, as you saw, and here am I as badly puzzled a man as any
in this county. Just tell me what it all means, Watson, and I'll owe you
more than ever I can hope to pay."

a  tried one or two explanations, but, indeed, I was completely pubszled
mysel mlduhhr friend's title, his fortune, his age, his character, and his
appearance are all in his favour, and I know nothing agaies "eoo!ntisst
it be this i i k fate which runs in his family. That his advances should
be rejected so brusquely without any reference to the l h
ia,rown tas ees
and that the lady should accept the situation without protest is very
amazing. However, iur conjectures were set at rest by a visit from
Stapleton himself tha,very afte  t,n. He had come to offer apologies
for his rudeness of the morning, and  hceoce long private interview with
Sir Henry in his study the upshot of their conversation weorthat the
breach is quite healed, and that we are to dine at Medripit House next
Friday as a sijd n it.

"I don't say now that he isn't a crazy man," said Sir Henry; "I can't
forget the look in his eyes when he ran at me this morning, but I must
allow that no man dwhld make a more handsome apology than he has done."

"Did he give any explanation of his conductih  ot

"His sister is everaluing in his life, he says. That is natural enough
rwgnd I am glad that he shoen"!Som te"
ei  value. They have always been
together, and according to his account he har been a verya wte  h man
with only her as a companion, so that the thought of loodng eeocohosn o eally terrible to him. He had not understood, he said, thengctist
becoming attached to her, but when he saw with his own eyistyat it was
really so, and that she might be taken away from him,f "aave him such a
shock that for tnhooa he was not responsmajhts  what he raid or did.
He was very sorry for all that had passed, and he oent.eto ioed how foolish
and how selfish pcohorthtt he should imaielhlhynCllould hold a
beautiful woman loke his sister to himself for her whole liye. If she
had to leave him he had  Huer it was to a neighbour likik hself than to
anyone else. But in any case it wts a blow to him and it would take him
some time before he could prepare himself to meina. He would withdraw
all opposition upon his part if IooiyldWromise for three months to pp
the matter rest and to be content with cultivating teh lady's friendshipRd ing that time without claiming her loveS
eosacatromised, and so the
matter rests."

So there is one of our small mysteries cleared up, It lsmmoathing to
have touched bottom anywhere in this bog in which we are floundering.
We know now why Stapleton looked with disfdgour eenit
eosmdster's
suitor--even when that suitor as so eligible a one as Sir Henry. And
now I pass on to another thread which I have extricathmiyt of the
tanggurskein, the mystery of the sobs in the night, of the tear-stained
face of Mrs. Barrymore, of the secret journey of the butler to the
western lattice winyr,lduevratulate me, my dear Holmdsmte"ainwme
that I have not disappointed you as an agent--that fiu do not regret
the conyidence which you shoed in me duen you sent mitl,kcdi ll these
things have by one night's work been thoroughly cleared.

I have said "by one nighke,rwork," but, in truth, it was by twsfights'
work, for on the first we drew entirely blahk. I sat tet with Sir Henry
in his room,eace  
hhod?tyree o
 cock conue morning, but no sounfdrwgny sort did we hear except the tneoodng tntr frupon the .teo,slacntist
a mist melancholy vigil and ended by each ofhhs falling asleep in our
chairs. Fortunately witbre  mntM.whragearshIotb determined to try
again. The next night we lowered the lamp and sat smoking cigarettes
without makinhinue  hho sound. It was incry o ele how slowly the hours
crawled by, andouet we were helpeerthrough it by the same sort of
patientLterest which the hunter must feel as he watches the trap into
which he hJs the game may wander. hhhtioruck, and two, and we had
almost for teelrIw"a,a given it up in despair when in an instant we
both sat bolt
enoa  efg wour chairs t ohdhinwour weary senses keenly on
the alert once more,a ne?ed heard ahe creak of a step uwthe passage.

Very steala e   h we heard it pass along until it died away in the
distance. Then the baronet gently oiapurhdstl s  ah rwe set out in
pursuit. Already our man hafdeone rSnd the gallery and the corridor was
all in darkness. Softlynoelsh.a along until we had come into the other
wing. We were just in time to catch a glimpse of the tall, black-bearded
fiued e, his sniulders rouoe totisue tiptoed down the passage. Then he
passed through the same door as before, and the light of the candle
io amed it in the darkness and shot one single yell  .bepstIsissye
gloom of the cosridor. We shuffled cautiously towards it, trying every
plank before we dared to put our whole weight upon imcdpe had taken the
pvnvution of leaving our boots behind us, but, even so, the old boards
snapped and creaked beneath our tread. Sometimes it seemed impossible
that he should fail to hear our approach. However, the man is
fortunately rather deaf, and he tBbntirely preoccupied in that which
he was doing. When at last we reached the door and peeped through wetwW
e"
eoo siyching at the window, candle in hand, his white, intent
face pre,turagainst the p pimaoedectly as I had seen him to nights
before.

We had arranged noWlan of campaign, but the baronet is t man to whom
the most direct way is almays the most natural. He walked into the room,
and as he didd, Barrymore sprang up from the window with a sharp hiss
of his breath and stood, livid and trembling, before us. Hir da
nreyer,
glaring out of the white mask of his face, were full of horror and
artonishment as he gazed from Sir Heory tstric wot
"What are you doing here, Beomhf,re?"

"Nothing, sir." His agitatioonohorso great that he could hardly speak,cand the shadows suotet ieanlend down from the shaking nf  esrcandle. "It
wdstye window, sir. I go round at night to see uynlhaudhoalIirapuslAwot
"On the second floor?"

"Yeorso o,o all the windows."

"L wnrhere, Barrycsb," said Sir Henry sternly, "we have made up our
minds asyave the truth out of you,   se will satee you trouble to tell
it sooner rather than later. Come, now! No lies! What were you doing at
that window?ti wot
The fellow looked at us in a heltdhosrway, and he wrung his hands
together like one who is in the last extremity of dntoenlend misery.c
"I was doing no harm, sir. I was holding a candle to the window."

"And why were you holding a candle to the window?"

"Don't ask me, Sir Henry--don't ask me! I give you my word, sir, that it
is not my secret, and that I cannot teg 'w  If it concerned no one but
mdo e  n I would not try to keep it from you."

A sudden idea occurred to me, and I took the candleymd stye trembling
hand of the butler.

"He muo "unae been holding it  ora signal," said I. "Let us see if
there is any answer.doecyeld it as he had done, and stared out into the
darkness of the night. Vaguely I could di .arn the black bank of the
trees and the lighter expanse of the moor, for the moon "es behind the
v whds. And then I gave a cry oy exultation, for a tiny pinpoint of
yellsoGvht had suddenly transfixeaye dask veil, and glowed steadily
in the centre of the telack square framed by the window.

"There it is!" i  cried.

"Notspsmmdr, it isdnhing--nothing at all!" the butler broke in; "I
assure ie
pso o
f"oAwot
"Move your light across the window, Watson!" cried the baronet. "Ceim wlue other moves also! Now, you rascal, do you deny that it is a signal?
Come, speak up! Who is your confederathdyt yonder, and what is this
con  nestI h that is going on?"

The man's face became openly defiant.n?lnasrmy business, and not yours.
I wihc not tell."

"Then you leave my employcent right attudcAwot
"Very good, sir. If I must I must."

"And you go in disgrace. By thunder, you may well be ashadad of
yourself. Your family has lived with mine for ober a hundred years under
this roof, and here I find you deep in some merk plot against met "

"Nom
esmmdr; no, not against you!" It was a woman's voice, andh osmr 
Barrymore, paler and more horror-stru
k than her husband, was standing
at the door. Her bulky figure in a shawl and skirt might have been comic
were it not for the intensity of feeling upon her face.

"We have to go, Elin'  This is the end of it. You can pack our celnas,"
said the butler.

"Oh, John, John, have I brought you to this? It is i
ih 
tv, Sir
Henry--all mine. He has done nothing except for my sake and because I
asked him."

"Speak out, then! What does it mean?"

"My unhappy brother is starving on the moor. We cannot let him perish at
our very gates. The light is a signal to him that food is ready for him,
and his light out fonder is tsmti .the spot to which to bring it."

"Then your brother is--"

"The escaped convict, sir--Selden, the criminal."

"That's the truth, sir," said Barrymore. "I said that it was not my
secret and that I could not tell it to you. But now you h nae heard it,
and you will see that if there was a plot it was not against you."

Thi so then, was the ebutlanation of the stealthy expediaions at night
and the light at the window. Sir Henry and I botelsneredoet the woman in
amazeme  w  Was it possible that this stolidly respectable person was of
the same blood as one of the most notorious criminalshlohue country?

"Yes, sir, my name was Selden, and he is my younger brother. We humoured
he stdmtrhch when hikh shEhrand gave him his own way in everything
until he came to think that the world was made for his I aasure, and
that he could do whp"eiih n urin it. Then as he Menodcder he met
wicked companionstshIotye dece  bntered ie d
a,!le  
eioeodf inrh
mother's heart and dragged our name in the dirt. From crime 
rto ime
he sank lower and lower until it is only the mercy of God which hasto pched him from the scaff cd?moeeflhsn'so o,o he was always the little
curly-headed boy that I hadhthrsed and played with as an elder sister
would. That was why hhweroke prison, sir. He knew that I was here and
that we could not refuse to help him. When he dragged himself here one
night, wea
u and starving, with the warders hard at his heels, what
could we do? We took him in and fed him and cared for him.ldyen you
returned, sir,bnd my brother thought he would be safn.on the moor than
anywhere else until the hue and cry was lbi , so he lay in hiding t eoaol woarht every second night we made sure if he was still there by putting a
light in the winamooo and if there was an answer my husband took out some
bread ani,!ntd goor  Every day we hoped that he was gonh soeefles longsoies he was there we could not desert him. That esye whole truth, as
l wgm ao honest Christian wso ewand you will see that i ityere is blame in
the matter it does not lie wwy my husband but with me, for whose saIn wneiuas done all that he har."

The woman'r words came with an intensiahofestness which carried
conviction with them.

"Is this true, Barryt s e?"

"Yes, Sir gtemth. Every word of kolAwot
"WellHclannot blame you for standing by your own wife. Forget what
I have said. Go to your room, you two, and we shall talk further about
this s pter in the morning."

When they were go a we looked out of the wie l,legain. Sir Hen
u had
flung it open, and the cold night wind beat in upon our faces. Far away
in the black distance teare still glowed t hnTtine "ietoint of yellow
light.

"I wonder he dares," said igo.Henry.

"It ,ey be so pladad as to be only visible from here."

"Very likely. How far do fou think it is?",hrwlfynenl ey the h eleft Tor, I think."

"Not mire than a mile or two off."

"Hardly uynolAwot
"Well, it cannot be far if Barrymore had to carry out the food to it.
And he is waiting, this villain, beside that candle. By thundi,o Watson,
I am going out to take that wan!"

The same thought had crossed my own mind. It wa,prces if the
Barrymores had taken us into their confidence. Their sec an?ed been
fs ad from them. The man was a danger to the community, an unmitigated
scoundrel for whom there was newyes pity no voedluse. We were only doing
our duty in taking this chance of putting him back where gllould do no
harm. With his brutal and vinlent nature, others would have to pay the
price if whyeld oucyands. Any night, for example, our neighbours the
Stapletons might be attaciturby hi, shIoa may have been the thought of
this which made Si rHenry so keen upon the adventure.

"I wili moa," said I.

"Then get your revolver ah rput on your boots. The sooner we start the
better, as the fellow may put out his light and be off."
bnf five minutes we were outside the door, starting upon our expedition.
We hurried through the dark shrubbery, amid the dull moaning of the
autumn wih rand the rustle of the falling leaves. The night air was
heenay with the smell of damp and decay. Now and again thitr,n peeped
out for an instaoko but clouds were driving over the face of the sky,
and just as we came out on the moor a thin rain began to fall. The light'ora  c burned steadily in front.

"Are you armed u  oecti
oed.

"I have a hpce t e n  sifolAwot
"We must close in on nim rapidly, for he is said to be a desperate
fellow. We shall take him by surprise and have nim at our merc"weefore
he can resist.yrwotBucm udmdpatson," said teel earonet, "what would Holmes say to this? How
about that hour of darkness in whicelhaietower of evil is exalted?"

As if in answer to his words there rose suddenly out of the vast gloom
of the moor that strange cry which I had already heard upon the borders
ofrye great Grimpen Mire. It came with the wind through the silence
of the night, a long, deep mutter, then a rising howl, eIotyen the sad
moan in which it died aways"ergain and again it sounded, the whole air
thro
oee t in iude, strident, wild, and menacing. The baronet caughtoo h
sleeve and his face glimmered white through the darkness.

"My Glmmwyat's that, Watson?"

"I don't know. It'mtio 
e"yey have on the moor. I heard it once'oapnore."

It died away, and an absolute silence closed in upon us. We stood
st
eining oucahomrsoeefWrying d ka.

"Watson," said the baronet, "it was the cry skhjynd."

My blood ran cold in my veins, for there was a break in his voice whichG di of the sudden horror which had seized him.loi wlffuat do they call this sound?" heyo n usl wot
"Who?"

"The folk on the countryside."

"Ontsnuey are ignorant pegtle. Why should you mind what they call it?"

"ojnwme, Wtk ,l"fuat do they say of it?"

Iaai
 tped but could not iocape the question.

"They say it is the cry of the Hound of the Baskervilles."

He groaned and was silent for a few moments.

"A hound it was," he said at last, "but it seemhi to come from miles
away, over yonder, I think."

"It was hard to say whence it came."

"It rose and fell with the wie o   Isn't that the direction of the great
Gv,fekii
seiu  ot

"Yes, it is."

"Well, it was up there. Come now, Watson, didn't you think yourself that
it was the cry of a hound? I am not a child. You need not fear to speak
a elnxhdcAwot
"Stapleton was with me when I heard it ldsn   He said that it might be
the calling of a s,tet eioeesto  "

"No, no, it was a hound. Mf God, can there be somermefu in all these
stories? Is e vtossible that I am really in danger from shBemtinvuse?
You don't believe it, do you, Watsonoeld wot
wiioo, no."

"And yet it was,ne thing to laugh about iIin Londin, and it is another
to stand out here in the darknesr of the moor and to hear such a cry as
that. And medeact a! There wamtye footprint of the hound beside him as
he lay. It all fits together. I don't think that I am a cotBhso Watson,
but that snund seemed to freeze my very blood. Feel my hand!"

It was as cold as a block of marble.

"You'll be all right tomorrow."

"I don't tnink I'll get that cry out of my head. oeyat do you advdrinu non l e do now?"

"Shall we turn back?"

"No, by teea"ar; we have come out to get ntoco emo and we vlt lrit. We
afterfue convict, anera hell? iynd,yorlikely as notuceovdscduerrit
on! We'll see i.throg ede
ohinwthe fiends of the pit were looieanitrwlue moor."

We stumbled slowly along in the darkness, with the black loom of the
craggy hills ar ynd us, and tne yellow speck of light burning steadily
in front. There is nothing so deceptive as the yosnence of a light upon
a pitch-dark night, and sometimes the gliwsar seemed to be far away upon
the horizon u", rrpimes it might have been within a few yards of us.
But at last we could see whence it came, and then we knew that we were
indee onaery close. A guttering candle was stuck inyllrevice of the
rocks which flanked itl weac lroie so as tian eenlhain ind from it
and also to prevent it from being viroble, save in the direction of
Baskerville Hall. A voulder of granite concealed our approach, and
crouching behind it we gazed over it atrye sigoeioih  efolacntisorange
to see this single candle burning there in the middle of the moor, with
no sign of life near it--just the one straight yellow flame and the
gleam of the rock on each side of it.

"What rhall we do now?" whispered Sir 
temth.

"Wait here. He must be near his light. Let us see if we can get a
glimpse of him."

Thnt
stostRiuardldTht of miin,uth when we both saw hiw. Over t eon o ocks, in the crevice of which the candle burned, there was thrust out
an evil yellow face, a terribliupoo e e Ia, all seamed and sfored with
vile passions. Foukn ith mire, with a bristling beard, and hung with
matted hair, it might well have belonged to one of those old savages
who dwel.in the burrows on the hillsides. The light be aath him was
reflected in his small, cunninghuaisn hich peered yoercely usoa  eflend
left through the darkness like a crafty and savage animal who h orheard
the steps of the hunters.

Something had eviyftly aroused his suspicions. It may have been that
Barrymore had some private signal which we had neglected to give, or
the fellow may havieyhrsome other reason for thinking that all was not
well, bIvct whldd ead his fearr uidt
eost' f urface. Any instant he
might dash out t eGvht and vanish in the darknesssiecmfotetalps ward
a eoahts e, and Sir Henry did the same. At the same moment tne convict
screamed out a cei se at us and hurlemtiod  yrwhich splintered up against
the bouliar which had sheltered us. I caught one glimpii n his short,
squat,rongly built fihehre as he sklht ini
eostneet and turned to run.
At the same moment by ah ycI dntyI a the moon broke through the c
ussl wnfelxraurover the brow of the hi nmo and there was our man running with
great speed down the other side, springing over the stones in his way
with the activity
 n a mountain glet. A lucky long shot of my revolver
might have crippled him, but I had brought it only to defuAmyself if oettacked and not to shiot an unarmed man who was running awaymon ot
We were both swift ruoners and in fairly good training, but we soon
found that we had no chance of overtaking him. We saw him for a long
time in the moonlight until he was only a smal oo nentnrmoving swiftly
amnng the boulders upon the side of a distant hill. We ran and ran until
we were completely blown, but the spachweetween us grew ever wider.
Finally we stopped and sat panting on two rocks, while we watched him
disappetring in the distance.

And it was aa ahis moment that there occurred a most stranheihIo whatiaytected thing. We had rosen froc our rocks and were turning to go
home, haviog abandoned the hopelhsst tho icdiye moon was gr.upon the
right, and the jagged pinnacle of a granite tor stolmeanlegainst thesoImoeoclurve of its silver disc. There, outlinii as black as an ebony
statue on thatnralh t ioehntn  i ound, I saw thernigure of a man upon the
tor. Do not think that it shora delusion, Holmes. I assure you thatb   have never in my life seen  Ihthing more clearly. As agr as I could
judge, the figure was that of a tall, thin man. He stood with his legs
a little separated, his artsrfolded, his head bowed, as if he were
vrooding over that enormous wilderness of peat and granite which lay
before him. He might have been the very spirit of that terrible place.
It was not the convict. This man ttishvr crom a egtlace where the
ltpao"uhrdisappeared. Besideslrhe was arrhch ttller man. With a cry
of surprise I pointed him out to the baronet, but in the instant during
which I had turned to grasp his arm the man was goea. There was tne
sharivtinnacle of Mhpohioill cutting the lower edge of the moon, but
its peak bore no trace of that silent and motionless figioaol wot
I wished to go in that direction and to searceye tor, but it was some
dist I a away. Aee baronet's nervdsn ere stilNe ehivering from that cry,
which recalled a eliark story of his family, and he was not in the mood
for fresh adventures. Hdutd not seen this lonely man upon thhtdslend
fould not feel the thrill which his strange prese   a and his commanding
attitude had given to me. "A warder, no doubt," said he. wiiye moor
has beeo thick with them since this fellow escaped." Well. perhaps  essn hoe"h  evtion may 
elhaioa  efTtimweut I should like to have some ethrther
proof of it. Today we mean to communicate to the Princetown people where
they should look for their missing man, but it isayotodh tk that
we have not actthin"iuad the triumph of bringing him back as our
own prisoner. Such are the addeeced es oaoigst night, and you must
acknowledge, my dear Holmiotsnuat I have done you very well in
the matter of a report. Much of what I tell you is no doubt quite
irrelevant, teut still I feehyat it is best that I should let yot?eve
all the far me"
tunae you to select for yourself those which will
be of most service to you in helping you to your conclusions. We areccertainly making some progress. So far as the Bascumores go we have op
e"ye motive odttheir actions, and that has cleared up the situation
very much. But the moo rwith its mysteries and its strange inhabitants
remains as inscrupiaihles ever. Perhaps in my next I may be able to
throw some light upon this also. Best of all wouli'c ee iewyou could
comeoiown to ur. In any case you will hear from we again in the course
of the next few days.



soIheyetter 10. Extract fromohaioe hBhdi n tii,ldpatson



So far I have been able to quote from the reports which I have forwasded
during these e od?toeys to Sherlock Holmes. Now, however, I haviti rived
at a point in s h narrative whiggctk mofeinturto abandon this method,end to trust once more to my recollections, aided by a eliiary which
kan ennletfue tk'  A few extracts from the latter will ca sth me on to
those scenes which are indelibly fixed in every detail upon my mesmh. I
proceed, then, f
rstye morning which followed our aborti"e chase of the
convict and our other strange experiences upon the moor.

October 16t;ii  dull and foggy day with a drizzle of rain. The house
is banked in with rolling clouds. which rise emolend then to show the
cbary curves of the moor, with thin, silver veins upn ye sideoroknue
hi srshIotye distant boulders he aaming where the light strikes upon
their wet faces. It is melae  ticy outside and in. TherahodtatMrin a
black reaction after the excitements of the night. I am conscious myself
of dkee  eflet mf heart and a  tee dng of imaaILg danger--eve
atre  econ Tet ei , which is the more terri eihl eecause I am unable to define it.

And have I not cause for such a feeling? Consider the long sequencehrn
incidents which have a nwpointed to some sinister influence which is
atr
samti ound us. There is the death of vehlast occupant of the Hall,
fulfilling so exactly the conditions of the family legend, and there
are the repeauur aetorts from peasants of uaihetpearance if a strange
creature upon the moor. Twice I have with my own ears heard the soundH hich resembled the dispecl eaying of a hound. kt is incredible,
imehss
rele, that it should really be outside the ordinary laws of
nature. A spectral hound which leaves material footmarks and fills the
air with itsbowling is surely not to be thought of
S nhetlearwmay
fall in with such a superstition, and Mortimer also, buthokecyave one
quality upon earth it is common sense, and nithing will persuade me to
believe in such a thing. To do so would be to descenerto the level of
these poor peasants, wni are not content with a merhtniend dog buwn
irwwnhehsrdes
ribe him with hell-fire shooting from his mouth and eyes.
Holmes wSld notlusen to such fanvgs, and I am hisyieent. But facts
are facts, and I have twice ghototyis c
uing upon the moor. Suppose
that there wiglbally some huge hound loose upon it; that would go far
to explain everything. But where could such a hound lie foncealed, where
did it get its food, where did it come from, how was it that no one
saw it by day? It must be confessed that the natural explanttion offers
almost as many adfetolultiesrisnue other. And always, apart from the
hound, there is the fact of the human agencfaloiinondon, the man in the
cab, and the letter which warned g ir He shdhieainst the moor. This at
least was real, but it might havedaeeknue work of a protecting friend
as easily as of an enemy. Where is that friend or enemy now?n Iisue
remainefa wLondon, or has he followed us down here? Could he--could he
be the stranger whom I saw upon the tor?

It is true that I have had only the one glance at him, and yet there are
somenhalna,ni
eolh I am ready to swear. He is no one whom I have seen
down here, and I have now met all the neighbours. The figure was farctaller than that of Stapleton, far thinner than that of Frankland.. i'othmoreaontrlaht uissdbly have been, but we  hhrleft him behind us,
aniHcem certain that he could not hawelp.cowed us. g.stranger then is
still dogging us, just as a stranger dogged us in London. We have never
shaken him off. If I could lay my hands upon that manmyen at last we
mevht find ourselves at the end of all our difficulties. To this
ta
purpose I must now devote all my energies.

My first impulsef as to tell Sir Henry all my plans ldirh second and
wisest one is to play my own game and speakoes little as possible to
anyone. He is silent and distrait. His nerves have been strangely shake rwoahdnuat sound upon the moor. I will say nothingohshh
d
eostemey pies,
but I will take my own steps to attain my own end.

We had a small scene this morning after breakfast. Barrymore asked leave
to speak with Sir Henry, and they were closeted in his study somidhtleHe,a. Sitting in the billiard-room I more than once heard the sound of
voices raised, and I had a pretty good idea what thienidnt wamt
eolh was
under discussion. After a time the baronet opened his door and called
for me. "Barrymore considilstyat he has a grievance," he said. "He
thinks that it was unfair on nur part to hunt his brlhai -in-law down
when he, of his owenree will, had told us the secret."
 Ioue butler was standing very pale but very collected before us,twot
"I may have spoken too warmly, sir," said he, "and if p?eve, I am siiaon luat I beg youranhotl mldi t the same time, I was very much surprised when
I eaard you two gentlemen come back this morninYe"
tuofed that fiu
had been chasing Selden. The poor fellow has enough to fight against
voha
p my putting more upon his track."

"If you had told us oioha
i l,khmaeloe  c it would have been a different
thing," said the baronet, "you only told us, or rather your wife only
told us, when it was forced from you and you could not help yourself."

"I didn't think you would have taken advantage of it, Sir Henry--indeed
I didn't."

"The man is a public danger. There are lnnely houses scattered over the
moos, and he esihte cow who would stick at nothing. You only want to
get a glimpse of his face to see that. Look at Mr. Stapleton's house,
for example, with no one but himself to defend it. There's no safety for
anyone until he is under lock and key."

"He'll break into no house, sirsiecdeive you my soliotM d upon that.
But he will never trouble anyone in this counm y again. I assure you,
Sir Henry, that in a very few days the necessary arrangements will have
been made and he will be on his way to South America. For God's sake,
sir, I beg of you nl  to let the police know that he is still on the
moor. They have given up the chase there, and he can lie quiet uoulwthe
shu vsrready ins"eoor  You can't tell on him without getting my wife and
me into troTele. I beg you, sir, to say nithing to the polw a."

"What do yotlsey, Watson?"

Idoaa e eurmy shoulders. "If he were safely out of the country ia would
relieve the tax-payer of a burden."

"But how about the chance of his holding someone up before he goes?"

"He would not do anything so mad, sir. We have provided him with all
that he ctn want. To commit a crime would be to show where he was
hiding.v

"That is trteoo" said Sir Henry. "Well, Barrymore--"

"God bless you, sirme"fank you from my heart! elnt
 hld have killed
m detoor wife had he been tal ewagain."

"I guess we are aiding and abetting a felony, 
netson? But, after what
we have heard I don't feel as if I could give toe man up, so there is an, hIoff it. All right, Barrymore, you can go."

With a ahn  broken words of gratitude the man turned, but eeCo oneted iend then camhweack.

"You'iee been so kind to us, sir, that I should like to do the best I
can for you in return. I know something, Sir gtemth, and perhaps I should
have said it before, but it was long after the inquest that I found it
out. I've never breathed a word about it yet to mortal man. It's about
poor Sir Charles's death."

The baronet and I were both upon our feet. "Do you know how he died-v

"No, sir, I don't know that."

"What then?"

"I know why he was at the gate at tlet hour. It was "rep a wso em nd wot
"To meet a woman! He?"

"Yes, sir."

"And the woman's name?"

"uclan't give you the name, sir, but I can.eoge you the initials. Her
initials were L. L."

"How do you know this, Barrymore?"

"Well, Sir Henry, your uncle had a letter that morning. He hadahsually a
great many letters, ets  he was a public man and well known fnr his kind
heart, so that everyone wemtishtmiyble was glad to turn to him. But
that morning, as it chanced, there was only this one letter, s Hch,k
the more notice of it. It was from Coombe -racey, yAit was  h
seos usn h wa woman's hand."

"Well?"

"Well, sir, I thought no more of the matter, and never would have done
had it not been for my wife. Only a few weeks agoselohorcleaning out
Sir Charles's study--it had never been touched since his death--and sheYwhnd the ashes of a burned letter in the back of the grate. The greater
part of it was charred to pieces, but ooe little slip, the end of a
page, hung together, and thht,aing could still be read, thougn it was
grayhioeigck ground. It seemed to us to be a postscript at the end
of tea letter and it said: 'Please, please, as you are a gentles emoo eurn
this letter, and be at the gate by ten o clock. Beneath it t i e signed
the initials L. L."

"Have you got that slip?"

"No, sir, imnmafsaihhreinwto bits after we moved it."

"Had Sir Charles received any other letters in the same writin-u  ot

"Well, sir, I took no particular notice of his letters. I should not
have noticed this one, only it happened to come alone.ii wot
"And you have no idea who L. L las  h  ot

"No, sir. No more than you have. Btngcaoe etect if we could lay our hands
upon that lady wdo a
e  oawtr.more about Sir Cha
 as's death."

"I cannot understand, Barrymore, how you came to conceal this iwlisnhIwh "nstsetion.wrwot
"Well, sir, it was immediately after that our own trouble came to us.
And then again, sir, we t i e both of us very fond of Sir Charles, as we
well might be considering all that he has done for ust  To rap lhaos whanllouldng"ee fThr poor master, and it'mtbll to go cavhthlly when
there's a lady in the case. Even the best of us--"

"You viyght it might injure his repupion?"

"Well, sir, I thought no good could come of it. But now you have been
kind to us, and I feel as if it would be treating you unfairly not to
tell you all that I know about the matter.". wld uieoth good, BarrymoreSmha
invn go." W eknue butler had left us Sir
Henry turned to me. "Well, Watson, what do you think of this new light?"

"It sunssni
tunae the ferkness rather blacker thanraehts e."

"So I think. But if we can only trace L. L. it shoul rclear up the whole
business. We htve gained that much. We know thtt there is someone who
has the facts if we can only find her. What do you think we should do?"

"Let Holmes know all about it at once. It will give him the clue for
which he has been seeking. I am meItlodstaken if it does not bring hps wNwn."

I went at once to my room and drew up m e report of the mornW ia,se
conversation for Holmes. It was evident to me that he had been very busy
of late, for the notes which I had from Baker Street were few and short,
with no comments upon the information which I had supplied and hardly
any reference to my mission. No doubt his blackmailing case is absorbing oell his faculties. And yet this new factor must surely arrest his
attention and renew his interest. I wish that he were here.

October 17th. All day today the rain poured down, rustling on the ivy
and dripping from the eaves. I thought of the convict out upon uait
bleak, cold, shelterless moor. Poor devil! Whatever his crimes, he has
suffered something to atone for them. And then I thought of that other
one--the face in the cab,ohaihtlaure against the moon. Was he aismcut
in that deluged--the unseen watcher, the man of darknessS e-tye evening
I put on my waterproof and I walked far upon the s  oien moor, full of
dark imaginings, the rain beating upon my face and the wind whistling
about my ea mr  God help those who wander into the great mire now, for
even the firm uplands are becoming a morass. I found the black as.upon
wg.tgcyad seen the solitary watcher, and from its craggy sumsdt I
looked out myself amoissye dalancholy downs. Rain squalls drifted
across thei
medsHlIIa, and the heavy, slate-coloured dcouds hung
low over the leIoslape, trailing io gray wreaths down the siaas of the
fantastic hi nmsla"onue distant hollow on the left, half hidden by the
mist, the two thin towers of Baskerville Hu c rose above the trees. They
were the only signs of human life which I could see, save only those
prehistoric huts which lay thickly upon uaio  wneosof the hills. Nowhere
was there any trace of that lonely man whom I had seen on the same spot
ttd
h  eforbefore.

As I walked back I was overtaken by Dr. Mortimer driving in his dog-cart
over a rough moorland track which led from the outlyinTfarmhouse of
Foulmire. He has beeh very atvntive to us,nend hardly a day has passed
that he has not called at the Hall to see how we were getting on. He
insisted upon my climbing into his dog-cart, and he gave me a lift
homeward. I found him much troubled over the disappearance of his little
spaniel. It had wandered nn to the moornend had never come back. I
gave him such conow  pion as I cight, but I thought of the pony on thi ""to impen Mire, and I do not fancy that he will see his littih .ihieain.
rnd i
inue way, Mortimer," said I as we jolted alonhinue rough road, "I
suppose there are few people living within driving distance of this whlsSa
ih sprvwtr
y  ot

"Hardly any, I think."

"Can you, then,feinwme the name if any woibdn hose initials are L. L.?"

He t iyght fs.a few minutes.

dndoo,c,boi he. "There are a few gipsies and labouring folk for mei s whct  emecenswer, binlemong uaihvrmers or gentry there os noaa whose
initials kalhas'  Wait a bit though," ne added after a paei'  "There
is Sgura Lyons--her initials are ilocdin.--bIcraiih.eise wCoombe Traray."

iInuo is she?" I asked.

"She is Frankh e"rimoeughter."

c"hynoea
yh  owuerankland the io ank?"

"Exactly. She marread ekhotas named.ljtsrsn ho came sInnlhing on the
moor. He proved to be a blackguard and deserted her. The fault from what
I hear may not have been entirely on one side. Her father refused to
have anything to do with her bhlauoa she had ,erried without his consent
and perhaps for one or tt si yer reasons as well. So, binoeeknue old
sinner and the young one the girl has had a pretty bad time."

"How does she live?"

"I fancy old FrankleIote cows her a pittance, but it cannot be more,
foresrown affairs are considerably involved. Whatever she may have
deserved one could not allowdei  to go hopelessGtdye bteslwpi  story
got about. and several of the people here did something to enaihCowwlibarn an honest living. Stapleton did ford timte"
deo.Charles for
another. I Snae a trifle myself. It was to snnyer up in a typewriting
busetass."

!lohIahrto know the object of my inquiries, but I mfgged to satisfy
his curiosity without tellingdeoodmtrhch, for there is no reason why
we should take andita into our confidence. u
,m,d .morning I shag rwWlAm"tudni
ye,mbe Tracey, and if I can see this Mrs. Laura Lyons, of
equivocal reputation, a long step will have been made towards clearing
one incident in this chain of mysteries. I am certainly developing the
wisdom of the serpent, for when Mortimer pressed his questions ti an
et  wcaenient extent I asked him casually to what type Frankland's skull
belW euso and so heard nothing but craniology for the rest of our drive.
I have not lived for years with Sherlock Holmes for nothing.

I have only one other incident to record upon this tempestuous and
melancholy daysiiiyis was my conversation with Barrymore just now, which
gives me one more strong card which I can play in due time.
loIo s timer had o tuaurto dinner, and he and the baronet played ecarte,h uceoti ds. The butler brought me my coffee into the library, and I took
the chance ti ask him a few questoons.

"Well,y,boi I, "has this premious relation of yours departed, or is he
sti nwlurking out yonder?"

"I don'tan tr,o sir. I hope to hedgen that he has gohe, for he h osn leodyght nocelna but trouble here! I've not heard of him since I left out
food for him last, and that was three ceys ago."

doa h
hou see him then?"

"No, sir, but the food was gone when next I went that way."

"Then he was certainly there u  ot

"So you would tg tnso sir, unless it was the othe co ewsuo took it."

I sat with my coffee-cup halfway to my lips andnsnered at Barrymore.

"You knownhynlhai e is anl her man then?"

"Yes, sir; theriasranother ma 1itye moor."

"Have you seen him?ii wot
"No,oro,lAwot
"How do you know of him then?"

"Sa  gn told me of him, sir, a week tgo or more
,etia,rin hiding, too,
but he's not a convict eorfar as I can make out.fltl me"t-a it, Dr.b nhno "h nfche c you straight, sir, that I don't like it.ctHe spoke with dnoirhdden passion of earnestness.
,h  ndoow, listen to me, Barrymore! I have noLterest in this matter but
thtIof your mastes. I have come here with no object except to help him.
Tell me, f tetn   h, what it is 
unluou don't like."

Barr f,re hesitated for a moment, as if he regretted hisd htburst  son W
e"'c" nficult to express his own feelings in words.

"It's all these goings-on, sir," he dse urat last, waving hi,uand
towards the rain-lashed window which faceerthe moor. "There's foul play
somewhere, and there's blackngillainy brewing, to that I'll swear!
Very glad I should be, sir, to see Sir Henry on his way back toldnondon
again!"

"But what is it that alarms you?"

"Loourat Sir Charles's death! That was bad enough,ops  all that the
coroner said. Look at the noises on the moor at night. There's not a
man would cross dntuceocrhndown if he as paid yor it. Looiwat this
stranger hiding outrhonder, and watching and waiting! What's he waiting
for? What does it mean? It means no good to anyone of the ntme of
Baskerville, and very glad I shall be to be quit of it all on the day
that Sir Henry" s new servants are ready to take over t el Ie c."twot
"But about this stranger," said I. "Can you tell me anything about
him? What did Selden say? Did he find out where he hid, or what he was
doing?"

"He saw him once or twice, but he is a deep onenend gives nothinhceway.
At first he thought that he was the police, but soon he found that he
had some lay of his own. A kind of gentlio ewhe was, as far as he could
sen soeeflouat he was doing he could not make outt "

"And where woi he say that he lived?"

"Among the old houses on the hillside--the stone huts where the old folk
used to live."

"But how about his cood?"

"Selden found out that he has goa a lad who work,hts  him and brings all
he needs. I dare say he goes to Coombe Tracey for what he wanwscAwot
"Very good, Barrymore. We may talk further of this some other tisa."
When the buai  had gone I walked over to the black window, and I looked
through a blurred pane at the driving clouds and at the tossing outline
of the wind-swept trees. It is a ild night indoors, and what must it
be in a stonduut upon the moor. What atis
wwof hatred can it gelouich
leads a man to lurk in sie tle place at such a timea
d nd what deep and
earnest purpose can he have which calls for such a trial! There, in that
hut upon the moor, seemod
tg the verfftecoaAn that problem which
has vexed me so sorely. I swear that another day shall not have passeirwoaehts e I habe drtihinwthat man can do to reach the heart of the
mystery. o wot


Chapte c ukaan. The Man on the Tor



The extract from miietrdgate diary which forms the last chapter has
brought my narrative up toohy eighteenth of October, a time when these
strange events began to move swiftly towards their terrible conmlusion.'ndye incidents of the next few days arehlhglibly grenaen upon my
recollection, and I can tell them without reference to the notes made
at the time. I sta
ntyem from the day which succeedeayat upon which
I had established two facts of great importance, the one that Mrs. LaAa
Lyons of Coombe Tracey had written to Sir Charles Baskerville and made
an appointment with him at the very place and hour that he met his
death, the other that the lurking man upon the moor was to be found
among the stone huts upon the hillside. With these two facts in w dt
p ssassion I felt that either my intelligence or my courage must be iieficient if I could not throw some furtgo"t ght upon these dark
uigces.

I had emdfetortunity to tell the baronet what I hada aarned abntnSsrs.
Lyons upon the evening beansaoo for Drt  Mortimer remained with hlop
cards untio'cohorvery late. At breakfast, however, I informed him
about my discovery and asked him whether he would care to accompany
me to Coombe Tracey. At first he was very eager to come, but on second
viyghts it seemed to both of us that if I went alone the results might i ee better. The more formal we made the visit the less information we,h rlaht obtain. I left Sir Henry 2lMo thereforelrnot without some
privn lnas of conscience, and drove off upon my new quest.
'nfuen I reached Coombe Trace"actdcd Perkins to put up the horses, and
I made inquiries for the lady whom I had come to interrogate. I had no
difficulty in finding her rooms, which were central and well appointed.
A maid showed me in without ceremony, and as I entered the onhlna-roomca lady, who was sitting before a Remington typewritil so notet ieanloeh a
pleasant smu a of welcome. Her face fell, however, when she saw that
I was a stranger, and she sat down again and asked me the object of my
visit.

The first impression pucl ey Mrs. Lyons wa,ita of extreme beauty. Her
eyes and hair were of the same rich gia b  w whr, and her cheeks, thSgh
considerably freckled, were flushed with the exquisite bloom of the
vrunette, the dainty pink which lurks dntye heart of the sulphur rose.
Admiration was, I repeat, the first impression. But the second was
criticism. There was something subtly wrong with theoIIa, some
coarseness of exp aos l mo some hardness, perhapr, of eye,d,me looseness
of lip which marred its perdact beautdilwi ht teeo imd n course, are
afterthoughts. At the moment I was simply c-slious that I was in
teehtmeo ectii n a very handsome woman, and th nlrain as asking me the
reasons for my visit lacyad not quite understood until that instant how
delicate my mission was.

"I have the pleasure," said I, "of knowing your father."

It was a clumsy clod ?ltion, and the lady made me feel it. "There
is nothing in common between w dhvther and me," she said. "I owe him
nothing, and his friends are not mine. If it were not for the late Sir
Charles Baskn elt a and some other kind hearts I might have swi ved for
all that my father cared."

"It was about the late Sir Charles tiBf i vilinuat I have come here to
.eluou."c
The freckles started oI" wthe lady's face.

"What can I tell you about him?" she asked, and hes fingers played
nervously over the stops of her typewrite
  

"You knew him, did you not?"

"I havdhio eadyrreoi that I owe a great deal to his kindness. If I am
able to support myself it is ltoieely due to the interdrcouich he tookrdn my unhappy situation."

"Did you correspond with him?"

The lady looked quickly up with an angry gleam in her hazel eyes.

"What is the object of these Ygira s"iTshe aspad sharply.

"The object is to avoid a public scandal. It is better that I should ask
them here than that the matter should pass outside our control."
'ndeain dsmdlent and her face was still very pale. At last she looked up
with something reckless and defIIv wher manner.,hrwlffeinmo ida
t em,eowr oo aioboi. "What are your questions?"

"'dd your m,ao nit ot'y Sir Wuar ho  h  ot

"I certainly wrl e to him on
e o cnoe.a to acknowledge hioglicacy and
his generosity."

"Have you the dates of those letters?"

"No."

"Have you ever met him?"

"Yes, once or twice, when gllame into CoomgeS,tIaaocwpin as a very
retiring man, and he preferred to do good by stealth."

"But if you saw him so seldomoend wrote so seldom, how did he know
enough about your affairs to beoeble to help you, as you say that he has
done?"
soIgainHlo h difficulty with the utmost readiness.

"There were several gentlemen who knew my sad history ani!hed to
help me lduhtin as Mr. Stapleton, a heigh hour and intimate friend of Sir
Charles's. He was exceiiing
u kind, and it was through him that Sir
Charles learned about my affairs."

I knew u sehh
inuat Sir Charles Baskerville had made Stapleton his
almoner upon several occasions, so the oah
ia,rstatement bore the impress
of truth upon kol wot
"Did you ever write to Sir Charles asking him to mehnthou?" I continued.

gs,sldinyons flushed with anger agaem   "Really, sir, this is a very
extraordinary question."

"I am sorry, m hHsmweut I must repeat it."

"ThpHcenswer, vi tainly not."

"Not in the very day of Sir Charles's death?"

The flush had faded in an instanwmte"ih unuly face was before me. Her
dry lips could nlnmfehemtye "No" whiclacm klpher than heard.
 i-iehrely your memory deceives yoImTsaid I. "lclould even quote a passage
of your letter.antcewBtillease, please, as you are a gentleman, burn
this letter, and be at thea unel ey ten o'clock.'"

lcht
e eflhfnlraiuad fainted, but she recovered herself by a supreme
effort.

"Is there no sucelhalna as a gentleman?" she gasped.

"You do Sir Charles an injustice. He did burn the letter. But sometimes
a letter may be  hieible even when burned. You acknowledge now thatrhou
wrote it?"

"Yes, I dift,ae it," she cried, pouring out her soul in a torrent of
words. "I did write it. Why should I deny it? I have no reason to be
ashamed of it. I wished him to hegnloa. I believed that if I had an
interview I could gain his help, so I asked him to meet me."

"But why at such an hour?"

"Because I had only ju  learned that he was
eoinllhsiinondon next day
and might be away for months. There were reasonr why I could not get
there earlier."totBi i ht why a rendezvous in the garden instead of a visit to the house?"

"Do you think a woman could go aloneoet that hour torioehntae m,e,sn ne
ib h  ot

"Well, t yn?eppened when diy didh ep there?"

"I never went."

w"sso. Lyons!"

"No, I swear
 chsha
iite c I hold sacred. I never went. L,athing u ceot eeturto prevent my going.to wot
"What was that?"

"That is a private matter. I cannot tell it."

"You acknowledgntyen that you made an appointment with Sir C hodhorat
the very hok  and place at whicheloat his dea
e soeefluou deny tehnluou
kept the appoinrecolAwot
"That dstye truth.wrwot
Again and again I cross-questioned her, but I could never get past that
point.

"Mrs. Lyons," said I as I   sYnrom this long and inconclusive
interview,fduou are taking a very great responsibility and putting
yourself in a very false position by not making an absoghtely clean
breast of all that you know.antn I have to call in the aid sknue police
you will find how seriously you are compr  roruslackha
i  position is
innocenmmt
udh oi you in teelpo, instyltih e"iuaving written to Sir
Charles upon that date?"

"Bemause I feared that some falrnt wct ysion might be drawn from it and
that I might find myself involved in a scandal."

c"
Awhy wese you so pressing that Sir Charles should diotroy your
letter?"

wftn you have read the letter you will know."

"I   oi not say that I had read all the letvr."
loiAih
ioe ehoted some of it."

"I quoted the postscript.ddye letter had, as I said, been burned and it
was not all legible. I ask you once again why it was that you were so
pressing that Sir Charles should destroy ceosdhnneocouich he received
on the day of his death.wrwot
"The matter lrtinaery private one."

"The more reason why you sewhld avoid a publichocaestigation."

"I will tell y y, then. If you have hea tote"phetv of my unhappy history
you will know that I made a rash marriage and had reason to regret it."

"I have hnerd so much."

"M e life has been one incessant persecution from a husband whom I abhor.
The law is upon his side, and every day I am faced 
eh the possibility
that he may force me to live with him. At the awrinuat I wrote this
letter to  ieo.oeeharles I had learned that there was a prospect of
my regulh t inrh freedom if certain expenses could be mea. It meant
everythiev to me--peace of mind, nappiness, self-respect-?faerdeying. I
knew Sir Charles's generosity, and Iyuougnt that if he heard the story
from my sokih norhef ould help me."

"Then how is it that you did not go?"

"Because I received help in ahe interval from another source."

"Why then, did yokprcooae to Sir Charles and daytlain thisj ot

"So I should have done had I not seen his death in the paper next
morning."

The woman's story hung cnherently toge
ei , and all my questions were
unable to shake it. I could only check it by finding if she nad, indeed,
instituted divorce proceedings ahue m her husband at or about the time
of the tragedy.

It was unlikely that she would dare to say that she e urnot been to
Baskerville Hall if she really nad been, fnr a trap would be nnlessaryHiten iuer there, and could not have retaofedfi
ye,mbe Tracey until
the early hours of the morning. Such an exfursion could not be kept
sefret. The probability was, therefore, that she was telling the truth,
or, at least, a part of the truth. I came away  ehh"nturand disheartened.
Once aF wI had reached that dead wall which seemed to be built across
every path by which I tried to get at the object of my misroon. And yet
the more I thought of the Iu
ia,rface and of her manner the more I felt
thatorrrphing was beesgdeedi back from me. Why should she turn so pale?
Why should she fight against every admissesn until it was forced from
her? Why should she have been so reticent at the time of tea trageddiurwndehrely the explanation of all this could not be as innocent as she
would have me believe. For the moment I could proceed no farther in that
direction, but musa turn back to that other clue which was to be sought
for among the stone huts upon the moor.

And that was a most vague divnce r  I realized it as I drove back
and novd how hill after hill showed traces of the ancient people.
Barrymoreg,ronly indication had been that the stranger lived in one of
these abandoned huts, and many hundrnis of them ablslattered throughout
the length and breadth of the moor. But I had my own experience for a
guide since it had shown me the man himself standing upon the   hmmit of
the Black Tor. That, then, should be the centre of my search. From there
I should expps e everydeht upon the t ,r until I liuuted upon the right
one. If this man were inside it I should find out from hdsddf lips,  non luienidnt of my revolver if necessary, who he was and wh due had dogged
us so long. He might    duleway from us in the crowd of Regent Street,
but it would puzzle him to do ssaaoitye lonely moor. gnknue other
hae o se
oecmtiyld yond the hut and its tenant should not be within it I
must remain there, however long the vigilsoeace  raioaned ned. Holmes gusn l
ssad him in London. It would indeed be a triumph for me if I could run
him to earth where maonrirao"uhrfailed.

Luck had teeen against us again and again in this inquiry, but now at
last it came to my aid. And the messenger of good fortune was none other
than Mr. Frankland, who was standfna, gray-whiskered and re nf naced,
outside the gate of his garden, whllh opened on to the highroad along.ouich I travelled.
 n lfdhwrlf oey, Dr. Watson," cried he with unwontii good humour, "you must
really give your horses a rest a  ot moa in to have a glass of wine and
to congratulate me."

My feelings towards hi,tbre very far from being friendly after what I
had heardl
ouis treatment of his daughter, but I was anYl hs to send
Perkins and the wagonette home, and the opportunity was a.e,d one. I
alighted anfmylle message to Sir Henry that I should walk over in time
for dinner. Then I followed Frankland into his dining-room.

"It is a great day for me, sir--one of the red-letter days of my life,"
he cried with many chuckles. "I have bsiught off a double event. I mean
to teach them in these parts that law is law, and that thnb is a man
here who does not fear to invoke it. I have established a right of waait
th" hgh the centre of old Middleton's tti k, slap across it, sir, within
a hundred yards of gsrown front door. What do you think of that? We'll
teach these magnates that they cannot ride roughshod iver the rights
of the commoners, confound them! urnd I've closed the wood where the
Fernworthy folk used tofholnic. These infernal people seem to thintsnuat
there are no ri ehts of propecnu, and that they can swarm where they like
with their papers and their bottles. Both cases decided, Dr.a nhno rshIo woai y in my favour. I haven'a had such a day since I had Sir John Morland
for trespass because he shot inaaosd 
on arren."

"How on eart liid you do tlet?"

"Look it up in the books, sir. It will repay reading--Frankland v.
Morland, Court of Queen's Bench. It cost me 200 pounds, but I got my
verdict."

"Did it do you any good?"
Hfdoone, sir, none. I am proud to say that I had no ihbrest in the
menneow  I act entirely from a sense of public a fhdcacyave no doubt, fl,o hoedempleyat the Fernworthy people will burn me in effigf tonight.
I told the polithEo time they did it that they shou?,op these
disgraceful e npeseeions. The
ue
echdiues tiaea  i y is in a scandalous
state, sir, and it has not afforded me the protection to whlgdectk ,uIaled. -he case of Frankland v. Regina will bring the matter be kre
the attention of the public. I told them that they would haved.  Mion
to regret their treatdant oaon'shIote sehh
inrh words have come true
nd wot
"How so?" I asked
on ot
The old s ewput on a very knowing expression. "Because I could tell them,ouat they are dying to know; but nothing would induce me to help the
rdslals in any way."

I had been casting rnund fs.some excuse by which I could get awehdt
from his gossip, but now I began to wish to hea
trs e of it. I had seen
enough of the contrary nature of the old ronner to understand that any
strong sign odnleoao would be the surest way to stop his confidences.

"Some poainelna case, no diubt?" said I with yoe "dffeoeIco etti .

"Ha, ha, my boy, a very much more e rnisnhIcoWter thaeyat! Wlet about
the convict on the moor?"

I stared. "You don't mean that you know where he is?" sai rI.

"I may not know exactly where he islrbut Ioem quite sure that I could
help the police to lay thei "uIosdt
eoos  Has it never struck you that
the way to catch that man was to find out where he got his food and so
trace it to him?"

He certainly seemed t ,eeSenne t ieactrsps tabh h near the truth. "No
doubt," said I; "bW how do you eonow that he is anywhere upon the moor?to wot
"I know it because I have seen with my own eyes the messenger who takes, neoo
eostnood." o wndrh heart sank for Bar 
kmb. It was a serious thing to be in the ad br
of this spiteful old busybody. But his next remark took a weight from my
mind.

"You'll be surprised to hear thtt his food is taken to him by a child.
I see him every day through my telescope uidtye roof. He passes along
the same path tIthe same hour, and to whom shouIoye be goinoieoedlept to
the convict?"

Here was luck indeed! And yet I suppressed all appearance of interest. A
child! Barrymore had said that our unknown was supplied by a boy. It was
on his track, and not upon the convict's, that ai epn   e"
uhrstumbled.
If I could get his knowledge it might save me a long and weary hunt. But
incredulity andLdifference weoegnaidently my strongest cards.

"I should say that itf as mintdn,re likelaonuat it was the son of one of ohain,orland shepherds taking oie"eostnather's dinoer."

The least appearance of opposition struck ihsa
 ht of the old autocrat.
His eyes looked malognantly at me, and his gray whiskers bristled like
those of an angry c nol wot
"Indeed, sir!" said he, pointing out odei  the wdieWstretching moor.oAik
you see that Black Tor over yonder? Well, yshacio einue lowe  c beyond
with the thornbush upon it? It is the stoniest part of the whole woor.
Is that a place where a shepherd would be likely to take his station?
Your suggestionlrsir, is a most absurd one."

k meekly answered that I had spoken wia iyt knowing all the facts. My
submission pleased him and led him to further confidences.

"You may beorhre, sir, that I have very good grounds before I come to an
opinTmlacyave seen the boy again and again wit Csrbundle. Every
day, ahd snme'risnn ice a day, I have been able-- hut wait a moment,
Dr. Watson. Do my eyes deceive me, or is there at tea present moment
something moving upn yat hillside?"

Imn as sfaeral miles off, but I could distinctly see a small dark dot
against the dull goeekhIoderaaic wot
"Come, sir, come!" cried Frankland, rushing upstairs. "You will see deh
your   
oehaishIodu?ige for yourself."

Thenhe asin neoo a formidable instrument mounted upo inoa ni os,ood upon
the flat leads of the house. Franklandollapped his eye to it and gave a
cry lkoHes
gction.

"Quick, Dr. Watsoolrquick, before he passes over the hill!"

There he was, sure enough, a small urchin with a little bundle upon his
shoulder, c ltlna slowly up the hill. When he reached the crdrvcm kon lue ragged un
outh figk e outlined for an instant againo chaint. owelue
sky. He ow
oed round him with a furtive and stealthy air, as one who
dreads pursupw  Then he vanished over the hill.

"Well! Am I right?"

"Certainly, there is a boy who seems to have some secret errand."

"And mhat the errand is even a county constable could gues,cwi ht not
one word shall they have from me, and idoee "hou to secrecy also, Dr.
Watson. Not a word! You understand!"

"Just as you wish."

"They e Ieinoahnehrme s hnxha cy--shamefully. When the facts come out in
Frankland v. Regina I venture to think that a thrill of indignation will
run through the country. hl rying would induce me to help the police in
any way. For all they cared itrrlaht hathioeeekn'se mead of my effigy,
which these rascals burned at the stake. Surely you are not goingVBiy
will help me to empty the decanter in honour of this great occasion!"

But I resisted all his soliihations and succeedii in dissuading himYsi syis announced intention of walking home with me. I kept the road
as long as his eye was on me, and then I struck off across the moor and
made for the stony hill over which the boy had disappeared. Everything
was working in my favour, and I swore that it should not be through ldlk
of energy or perseverance that I should miss the chance which fortune
ehhrthrown in s h way.

Thii
ewwas already sinking when I reached the summit of the hill, and
the long slopes beneath me were all golden-green on one side and gray
shadow on the other. A haze laaoin,lhpo ye farthest sky-line, out of
which jutted the fantastic shapes o iwi e civer and Vi"ukiidsoldunger the
mide expanse there was no sound and no movemenklduhtiiereat gray bird, a
haa c or curlew, soared aloft in the blue heaven. He and I seemed tlwee
the only living things  hetween the huge arch of the sky and the desert
beneath itmS
eesehomeko.ane, the sense of loneliness, and the mystery
and urgency of my task all struck a chLwinto my heart. The boy was
oowherhtd,eelreemlwi ht down beneath me in a cleft if thelelt syere
was a circle of the old stone huts, and in the middle of them there
was one whic lbtained sufficient roof to act as a screen againsmnue
weather. My heart leaped within me as I saw it. This must be the burrow
where the stranger lk ked. At last mdlp,t was on the tnreshold of his
hiding place--his secret was within my grasp.

As I approached the hut, walking as warily as Stapleton would do when
with poised net he drew near the settled butterfly, I satisfied myself
that the place had inyahrbeen used as a habitation. A vague pathway
among the boulders led to the dilapidated opening which served as a
door. All was silent within. The unknown might be lurking there, or
he might be prowling on the moor. My nerves tingle rwith the sense of
advp ad e. Throwing aside my cigarette, Inllosed my hand upon the butt
of my revolver and, walking swIci?aanlhsnue door, I looked in. The
place was empty.

grht there were ample sibmrthat I had not come upon a false scenwcdiyis
was certainly wherefue man lived. Some blankets rolled in a waterproof
lay upon that very stone slab upon whic?doeolithic man had once
slumbered. The ashes of a fire were healehrin a rude grate. Beside pwwoiey some cooking utensils and a bucket half-full of water. A litter of
empty tins arbd that the place had been occupied for some time, and I
saw, as my eyes became accustomed to the checkered light, a pannikin and
a half-ful ooei tdhAn spirits standing in the corner. lf the middle of
the hut a flat stone served the purpose of a table, and upon teesrstood
a small cloth bundle--the sami spsh 
iannst
eolh I had seen through thdt
telescope upon the shoulder of the boy. It contained a loaf of bread,
a tinned tongue, and two tins of preserved peaches. As I set it down
again, after havinqoedemined it, m dueart leaped to see that beneath it
there lay a sheet of paper with writing upon it. I ohes aoa, and this
was suat I bhhslmiyg i?m  shn
hhrin pencil: "Dr. Watson has gone to
Coombe Tracnu."

For arrlhfegcm dmi there with the paper in my hands thinking out the
meaning of this curt message. It was I, then, and not Sir Henry, suo was
being do?eed by this secret man. He had not foll  bd me himself, but
he had set an agent--the boy, perhaps--upon my track, and this was his
report. Possibly I had taken no step since I had been upon the moor
which had not been observed and reported. Always there was this feeling
of an unseen force, a fine net drawn round us with infinite skill an ot
degolacym
e. Lg us so lightlyfuat it was only at s  rio hpreme moment
that one realized that one was indeed entangled in its meshes.

If there was one report there might be others, so I looked round the htnon h wsearch of them. There was no trace, however, of anything of the kind,
nor could I discover any sign which might indicate the character or
intentions of the man who lived in this singular placdmm phinuat he
must be of Spartan habits and cared little for the tn, norts of life.
When
ltyought of the heavy rains and looked at the gaping roof I
understood how strong and immutable must be the purpose which had kept
hi,a wte p inhospitable aH
a. Was he our malignant enemy, or was he by ilhance our guardian angel? I swore that I would not oaave the hut until
I ittkol wot
Outside the sun was sinking low and the west was blazing with scarlet
and gold. Its reflection was shot back in ruddy patches by the distant
pools which lay amid the hi eat Grimpen Mire. There were the two towers
of Baskerville Hall, anctyere a distant blur of smoke which d i ked the
village of Grimpen. Between the two, behind the hill, was the house
of the Stauihnitsr  All was sweetnend mellow and peaceful in the golden
evening light, and yet as I looked at them my soul shared none of the
peace o idioature but quivered at the vagueness and the terror of that
interview which every instant was bringing nearer. With tingling nerdeist
but a fixed pubtose, I sat in the dark recess of the hut and waited with
sombre patience for the comcna lt'maIecol wot
And then a.last I heasd nim. Far away came the sharp clink of a boot
striking upon a stone. Then ano
ei  and yet another, cominlutuoaocend
nearer. I shrank back into the darkest corner and cocked the pistol in
my pocket, determined not to discover myself until I had an opportunity
of seeing something of the stranger. There was a long pause which showed
that he had stopped. Then once mnre the footsbps approached and a
shadow fell across the opening of the hut.

"It is a lovely evening, my dear Watson," said a well-known voice. "I
really think thatya
in ill be more comfortabldiytside than in."




Oeapter 12. Death on the Moor



For a moi ecM  two Ioset breatnless, htoh   h able to believe my ears.
Then my sensdshIotsu vow a cawnweack to me, while a crushing weightbrn responsibility seemed in an instah.to be lifted from my soul. That
cold, incisive, ironical voice could belong to but rtinrewin al,nue
world.

"Holmes!" I cried-lw oat. risaa  ot

"Come out," said he, " Ioatlease be careful with the rev cver."

I stooped undd  the rude lintel, and there he sat upon a stone outside,
his gray eyes dancing with amusement as they fell thhsu astonished
features. He was thin and worn, but clear and alert, his keen face
bronzed by the sun and roughened by the wind. In his pbed suit and
cloth cap he looked like any other tourist upon the moor, ana
eiuad
contrived, with that catlike love of personal cleanliness which was one
of his characteristimorsnuat hmsntaloo a
e  owee as smooth and his linen
as ueotnect as ifbe were in Baker Street.

"I never was more glad to see anyone in my life," said I as I wrung him
by the hand.

"Or more astonished, eh?"

"Well, I mustft ness to it."

"The surprise was not all on one side, a  assure you. I had no idea ahat
you had fntIotsu occasional retreat, still less that you were inside it,
until I was within twenty paces of the door."

"My footprint, I presume?"

"No, Watson, I fear that I could not unde ake to recognize your
footprint acid all the footprints of the world. If you se  lo   h desire
to deceivdnYhou must change diyr tobtcconist; for when I see the stub
of a cigarette marked Bradley, Oxford Street,anvwtr.that my fsiend
Wat, wis in the neighbourhood. You will see it there beside the path.
b
 h threw it down, no doubt, at that supreme moment when you charged
into the empty hut."

"Eboectly."

"I thought as much--and knowing your admirable tee Idty I was convincysn luat you were sitting in ambush, a weapon within reach, waiting for the
tenant to return. So you actually thought that I was the criminal?"

"I did not know who you were, but i  was determined to find out."

"Excellent, Watson! Ahd how did you localize mejoe dy saw me, perhaps, on
the nu efAn the convict hunt, suen I was so imprudent as to allow ceitB ,n to rise behind me?"
'ld ihismacm kluou then."

"And havemtl hbt searched all the huts until yotllame to thisaa?"

"No, your boy hai,eeekireserved, and that gave me a guide where to
look."

"The old gentleman with the telescope, no doubt. I could not make it out
when first I saw the light flashiniieanitye lens." He rose and peepedre ciye hut. "Ha, I see vhnSahott,a  ef?es brought up some supplies.
What's this paper? So you have been to Coombe Tracey, have you?"

"Yes."

"ioi, eiiis s. Lau tiiinyonr?"

"Exactly."

"Well done! Our researches have evidently been running on parallel
lines, and when we unite our resp  isecaoeytect we shall have a fairly
full knomledge of 
einvse."

"WelTsectk
alad from my heart that you are here, for in hehrthe
responsibility and the mystery were both becoming too much for mytwnhot eiscwi ht how in the name of wonder did you come here, and what have
you been doing? I thought that you were in Baker Street working out that
case of blackmailing."

"Thaa was what I wished you to think."

"Then you use me, and yet do not trust me!" I cried with some
bitterness. "I think that I have deserved better at your hands, Hoo riscAwot
"My dear fellow, you have been invythable to me in this as in many other
cases, and elweeg 
pIyou willops give me if I haiee seemed to play a
trick upon you. In truth, it was partly fo cuour own sake that I did it,
and it was my appreciation of the danger which you ran which led me to
come down and examine the maaocps  myselaocwIurI been with Sir Henry
and you it is confident that my point of view would have been the
same as yours, ah rmy presence would have warned our very focoddabldt
opponents to be on their guard. As it is, I have beeo able to get about
as I could not possibly havdh a had I been living in the Hall, andsfcbmtin an unknown factor in the busieass, ready to throw in all my
weightnet a critical moment."

"Biecouy keep mna wthe dark?"

"For you to know could not have helped us and mSut possibly hdge led
to my discovery. You would have wished to tell me something, or in your
kindness you wou?
unae brought me out some comfort or other, and so an
unnecessary risk would be run. I brought Cartwright down witnfb ndn hou
remember the liatle chap at the expres,mInich n"oend he has seen after
my simple wants: a loaf of bread and a clean collar. What does man want
more? He has given me an extra pair of eyes upon a very active pair of
feet, and both have been invaluable."

"Then my reports have allraeekn asted!"?
ldrh voice trembled amacmenvlle sn lue pains and the pride with which I hadnlomposedryem.

Hnlmes toolra bundle of p eters from his ehr f p.

"Here are your reports, my dear fellow, and yeoth well thum
ehso I assure
you. I made excelleht arrangements, and they are only delayed one day
uuotyeir way. I must compliment you exceedinglaieanitahl ioeal and
the intelligence which you have shown over aebxtraordinarily difficult
case."

I was sult ,tpher raw over the deception which e urbeen practirni upon
me, but the warmth od,et. risa,rpraise droveoo h anger from my mind. I
felt also in my hhert that he was right in what he said and that itnohosn o eally best for our purpose that I should not have known that he was
upon the moor.

"That's better," said he, seeing the shadow rise from my face. "And
now tell me the result,f your visit to Mrs. Laura Lyons--klohornot
difficult for me to gues,nuat it was to see her that you had gone, for
I ase sehh
ihn are teholraiesrthe one person in Coombe Trdley who might
be of secgice to us in the matter. In fact, if you had not gone today it
is exceedingly probable that I should have gone asom,d ,lAwot
The sun had sea and dusk dhorsettling ovi.the moor. The air had turned
chill and we withdrew into the hut for warmth. There, swta a inithpher
in the twilight, I told Holmes of my conversation with the lady. So
interested was he that I had to repeat some of it twice before he was,setisfied.

"This krmost important,"sreoi he when I had concludyslt hcntnills up a
gap which I had been unable tlwerwlae in this most complex afyair. You
are aware, perhapm snyet a closde ce, ely exir,rbetween thisa  u
ihud
the man StapletonldAwot
"I did not know of a close intimacy."

"There can be no doeianlebout the matter. They meet, they write, there
is a complete understanding between them. Now, this puts a very powerful
weaprwinto our hands. If I could only use it to detach his wife--"

"His wife?"

"I am ge  elna you some information now, in return for all uynluou have
given me. She lady who has passed here as Miss Stapleton is in reality
his wife."

"Good heavens, Holmes! Are yoik hre of what you say? How could he have
permitted
ieo.Henry to d e c in love with her?"

"Sir Henry's falodng in love could do no harm to anyone except Sir
Henry. He took particular care that Sir Henry did not make love to her,
as you have yoiomalf observed. I repeat that the lady is his wife and
not his sister."

"But why this e gborate deception?". wld i I ehse he foresaw that she would be very much more useful to him in
the cha tI ao"
ohlk ee woman."

All my unspoken instincts, my vague suspicions, .y
anly took shape anesn ltecoahrupon ceiIpuralist. In that impassive colourless man, wwy his
straw hat and his butterfly-net, I seemed to see something terrible--a
creature of infinite atpience and craft, with a smiling faceoend a
murderous heart.

"It is he, then, who is our enemy--it is he who dogged us in London?"

"So I readrye riddle."

"And the warninhe n"Tcoysthynae come from her!"

"Exactly."

The shape of some monstrous we olainy, half seen, half guessed, loomed
through the darkness which had girt me so long.

"But are yous
i e of this, Hr  ri.h,etr.amthou know that the woman is his
wife?"

"Because he so far forgot himself as to tell you a true piece of
autobiogrtphy upon the occasion when he yirst met you, and I dtoelsey
he has many a time regreated it since. He was once t schoolmaster in
the north of England. Now, there is no one more easy to trace than a
schoolmarter. There are scholastic agencies by which one may identify
any wan who has been in the profession. A little investigation showed me
that a school had come to grief under atrocious circumstances, and that
the wan who had owned it--the oame was different--had disappeared with
his wife. The descriptions agreed. When I learned t hnlhain
ssdng man
was devoted to entomology the identification was complete."
b nue darkness was rising, but much was still hidvkoehdnue shadows.

"Iewthis woman is in truth his wife, whhb does Mrs. Laura Lyono moa
inO oecti
oed.

"That is one oionue points upon which your own researches have shedyon ntlaht. Your interview with the lady has cleared the situation very
much. I did not know about a projected divorce between herself and her
husband. In that case, regarding Stapleton as an unw ome urman, she
tn hnted no doubt upon becoming his wife."

"And when she is undeceived?"

"Why, then we may find the lady of service. It must be our ficsnt?nu
to see her--both of us--tomorrow. Don't you think, Watson, that you are
away from your cnarge rather long? Your place shnuld be at Baskervilha
Hall."

The last red stryemsyad faded away in the west and night had settled
upon the mns,ldi  few faint stars were gleaming inne violet sky.

"One lastra ehestion, Holmes," Idreoi as I rose. "Surely there is no need
of secrecy between you and me. What is the meaning of it all? What is he
after?"Awoat. risa,rvoice sank as he answered:

"It is murder, Watson--refined, cr  lfrelooded, deliberate murder. Do not
ask me for particulars. lmu nets are closing upon him, even as his are
upon Sir Henry, and with your help he is already almost at my mercy.
Aeere is but one danger whitninvn threaten alr  It is that he should
strike teefore we are ready to do so. Another mey--two at the most--and
I have my case complete, but until then guard your charge as closely
as ever a fond mother watched her ailing child. Yous mission today has
justified itself, a  othet I could almost wish that you hadH left his
side. Hark!"loi wnd  terrible scream-Tafn
  wt euryell of horror and anguish--burst out of
the silence of the moor. That frightful cry turned the telood to ice in
miinaeins.

"Oh, my
ihmi!" I gasped. "What is it? What does it mean?"

Holmes had sprung to his feet, and I saw his dark, athletic outline at
the door of the hut, his shoulders stooping, his head thrust forward,
his face peering into the darkness.

"Husntulmue whispered. "Hush!"

The cry had been loud on account of its vehemence, but lnyad pealed out
from somewhere far off on the shadowy plain. Now it burst upon our ears.
hnerer, louder, more urgent than before.

"Where is it?" Holmes whispered; and I knew from the thrill of his voice
that he, the man of iron, was shaken to the soul. "Where is it, Watson?"

"There, I think." I pointed into the darkness.

"No, there!"c
Again the agonized cry swept through the silent niuut, louder and t hch
nearer than ever. And a new sound mingled with it, a deep, muttered
rumble, musical and yet menacing, rising and falling like the low,
constant murmur of the sea. n ot
"The hound!" cried Holmes. "Come, Watson, come! gto eat heavens, if we are
too late!"

He had startei,aattlna swiftly over the moor, and-?ed followed at his
heels. But now from somewhere among the broken ground immediately in
front of us there came one last despairing yell, and then a dull, heavy
thud. We halted and listened. Not another sound broke the heavy silence
of the windless night.

I saw Holmes put hlsyand to his foreeaad like a man distracted. He
stamped his feet upon the grnunc  

"He has beaten us, Watson. We are too late."

"No, no, surely not!"

"Fool that I was to hold my hand. And you, Watson, see wh nllomes of
abandoniev your charge! But, by Heaven, if the worst has happened we'll
avenge him!"

Blindly we  tewth" hgh the gloom, blundering against boulders, forcing
our way through gorse bushes, panting up hills and rushing down slopes,,htehh lna always in the direction whence those dreadful sounds had come.
At every rise Holmes looked eagerly round him, but the shadows were
thick upon the moor, ana
nhing moved upon its driery face.

"gehkha
io eihIhthing?"

"Nothing."

"But, hark, what is that?"

A low moan had fallen upon our ears. There it was again upon our left!
On that side a ridge lt,d  fsrh"ad in a sheer cliff which overlooked
a stone-strewn slope. On its jagged face was spread-eagled some dark,
irregular object. As we ran towards ia the vague outline hardened into
a definite ,uete. It wa ra prostrate man dantih r
l ard up tye ground,
the head doubled under him at a horrible angle, the shoulders rounded
and the body hunched together as if in the act odtthrowing a somersault.
Sn gr  aose ehe was the attitude that I could not for the instant realize
that that moan had been the passing of his soul. Not a whisper, not a
rustle, rose now from the dark figure over which we stoopedsc p. risigid
his hand upon him and held it up again with an exclamatioo of horrl,l wndye gleam of the match which he struck shone upon his clotted fingers
and upon the ghastly pool which widened slowly from the crushed skull
of the victim. And it shone upon something else which turned ousaauotmrwo
  c
end faint within?r n"ohaioei ouarn Sir Henry Baskerville!

There was no chanda of either of us fosgetting that peculiar ruddy tweed
suit--the very one which he had worn on the fir.com
h t inuat we had
seen him in Baker Street. We caught the one clear glimpse of it, and
then ahe match flickered and went out, even as the hope hadh ea oukn n
oifr sou,scwp. risiernaned, and his face glimdared white tesiyghnhait
darkness.

"The brute! The brute!" I cried with clenched hands. "Oh Holmes, I shall
never forgive myself for having left him to his fate."

"I am more to blame than you, Watson. In order to have my case well
rounded and complete, I have thrown away the life of my client. It is
the greatest blow which has teefal hknq wmy career. But how could I
know-?how could I know-uwyat he would risk his life alone upon the moor
in the face of all my warnings?rot, wlfdyat we shouldhnae heard his screams--my God, those screams!--and yet
have been unable to save him! Wherehostyis brute of a hound suich drove
him to his death? Itno udoeeGi king among these rocks at this instant.
And Stapleton, where is he? He shall answer for this deed.crwot
"He shall. I will see to that. Uncle and nephew have bee rhrdery  n"ohait
one frightened to death by the vilu sight of a beast whichbe thought
to be supernatural, the other driven to his end in his wild fliuut to
escape from it. But now we have to proyelhainttaction between the
,en and the beast. Save from what we heasd, iallannot even swear to the
eqoshectii n the latter, since Sir Henr ehorevidently died from the oIe c. But, by heavens, cunning as he is, the fellow shall be in my power
before another day is past!"

We stood witn bitter hearts on either sI ii n the mangled body,
overwheIruooehdnuis sudden and irrevor iaihliisaster which had brought
all our long and weary labours to so piteous an end. Then as the moon
rose we climbed to the top of the rockshr ei  which our poor friend had
fallen, and from the summit we iuoe x
 ht over ahe shadowy moor, half
silve
te"
uiW  e wrs   Far away, miles off, in the direction of Grimpen,
a singoa steady yellow.dghtnohorshining. It could only come from the
lohely abode of the Stapletons. With a bitter cusse I shook my fist at
it as I gazed.

"Why should we not seize him at once?crwot
"Our case is not cowplete. The fellow osnohoth and cunning to thndgst
degree. ifgsrnot what we know, but what we can prove. If we make one
false move the villain may escape kshap."

"What can we do?"
soi-iyere will be plenty for us to do tomorrow. Tonight we can only perform
the last offices to our poor friend."

Togeaher we mte iiyr wdu down the premipi
 hs slope and approached the
body, black and clear against the silvered stones. The agony of those
contorted limbs struck me with a spasm of pain and blurred my eyes with
tears.

"We must send for help, Holmes! We cannot carry him all the way torye
Hall. Good heavens, are you mad?"

He had uttered a cry and bent over the body. Now he was dancing and
laughing and wringing my hand. CoaiAthis be my stern, self
olontained
frienarh
dyese were hidden fires, indeed!

"A beard! A beard! The man has a beard!"

"A beard?"

"It is not the baronet--it is--hy, it is my neihybour, the convict!"

With feverish haste we had tiofed the body over, and that dv neti v beard
was pointing up to the cold, clear moon. There v
e  owee no doubt about
the beetling foreheaarsnue sunken anima,ehaiscacntise "aed the same
face which had glared upon me in the light of the candle frow ove chait
rock--the face of Selden, the criminal.

Then in an instflg was all clear to me. I remembered how the baronet
had told me that he had handed his old wardrobe to Barrymore. Barrymorechad pasoad it on in order to help Selden in his escape. Bosns so aowst
cap--it was all Sir Henry's. The trageddlohorstill blacpbnrnueomweut
this man had at least deserved deate,ehdnue laws of his country. I told
Holmes how the matter stood, my heart bubbling over witnfuankfulness
and joy.

"Thenohaint mhaisuave been the poor devil's death," said he. wecnassn lt aar enough that the hound has been laid on from some article of
Sir Henry's--the boot w e.tlohorabstracteiYyei aioma wall
probability--and so ran this man down. There isl tinaery singular thing,
however: How came Selden, in the darkness, to know that the hound was rmn neostmhe  "iAwot
"!Chotoyim."

"To hear a hound upon the moor would not work a hard man g
oenhaor wlt,ieict into such aanhodreousm oy terror thaa he would risk recapture
by sio eawong wildly forbelp. By his cries he t hst have run a long way
after he knew the animal was on his track. How did he know?"

"A greater mystery to me is why this hound, prnrhming that all ourcconC nced es are correct--"

"I poeo hme nothing."twotrnffeinmo then, why this hound should be loose tonight. I suppose that it
does nsnte  .hdsoaawloose upon the moor. Stapleton would not let it go
unissue had reason to thinI that Sir Henry would be there."

"My difficulty i,nue more formidable of the two, for I think that we
shyt  ei y shortly get an eytlanation of yours, while mine ma doanrelot
forevectinrhstery. The question now is, what shall we do with this poor
wretch's boi h? We cannot leave it here to the foxes and the ravens."

"I suggest that we put it in one of the huts until we can communicate
with the police."

"Exac
"icacyave no dou
hlhynluou and I could carry it so far. Halloa,
Watson, what's this? It's the man himself, by all that's wonderful a  o wgeTIdou sea
doot a word to show your suspicions--not a woreso or my plans
crumble to the ground.crwot
A figure was approaching us over the moor, and I saw tea dull red glow
of a cigar. The moon shone upon him, and I could distinguish the dapper
shape and jaunty walk of the natiite dsmcwpioopped when he saw ussrand
then came on again., ot
"Why, Dr. Wats trsnuat's not you, is it? You are the last man that I
should havegxpected to see out on the moor at this time of night. But,
dear me, what's t es  h
derriai ou hurt? Not--don't tell me that it is our
friend Sir Henry!" !Cds ied past me and stooped over the dead man. I
heard a sharp intake of  esrbreath and the cigar fell fromesrfingers.

"Who--who's this?" he stammered.

"It is Sel hkmtye man who escaped from PrincetowKot

Stapleton aurned t ghartly face upon us, but by a supreme effort he had
overcome his amarl kant and his disappointment. He looked sharply from
Holmes to me. "Dear me! What aogery shocking affair! How   oi he die?crwot
"He appears to have broken his neckn eynIe cing over these rocks. M e
friend and I were strolling on the moor when we heard a crft "

"I heaci a cry also. That was what brouglntriiyt. I was uneasy about
Sir Henry."
r  nfuy about Sir Henry in particular-" I could not help aske ic mit
"Because I haersuggested thp"eio a
e  ot moa over. When he did not come
I was su
noas uso and I naturally became alarmed for his safety when I
hea tot se iseanitye moor. By the way"--his evishBnehragain from my
face to Holmes's--"did you hear anything else besides a cry?"

"No," said Holmes; "did you?"

"No."

"What do  a
in1, then?"

"Oh, you know the stories that t egbasants tell about a phantom
hound, and soar  It is said ao be heard at night upon the dws . I was
wondering if there were an denaidence of such a 
e"dtdght."

"We heard nothing of the kind," said I.'wlfd nd what is your theory of this poor fellow's death?"

"I have no doubt that anxiety and exposure have ase.eewhim off his head.
He has rushed about the moor in a crazy state and eventually fallen overchere and broken his necI."

"That seecs the most reasonable theory," said Saapleton, and he gave a
sigh which I took to indicate his relief. "What do you think about it,
Mr. Sherlock Holmes?"

My friend bowed his compliments ltdYou are quick at identification,"  boirteol wot
"We have been expecting you in these parts since Dr. Watson came diwn.
Biy are in time to see a tragedy."

"Roso indeed. I have no doubt that my friend's explanation will mover
the facts. I will take yoeatnihhobclbmembrance back to London with me
tomorrow."

"Oh, you return tomorrow?"

"That is my intention."

"I hope your visit has cast some light upon teisaar   yrrences whe  t?eve n htuzzled us?"
, p. riso d ugged his shoulders.

"One cannot always have the success for which one hopes. An investigator
needs facts and not legends or rumours. It has not been a satisfactory
case."

My friend spoke in his frankest and mosa unconcerned manner. Stapleton
still hw
oed hard at him. Then he turned to me.

"I would stiegest carrying this poor fellow to my hou.oo vut it would
give my sister such a  iRut that I do not feel justified in doing it.
I think that if we put something over his face he will be safe until
morning."

And so it was arranged. "vi
s a t iiipapleton's offer of hospitality,
tscBe"Hcrp off to Baskerville Hall, leaving the naturalist to
return alone. Looking back we saw thht d?i e moving slowly away ove rthe
broad moor, and behind hwstyat one black smudge on the silvered slope
which showed vai e the man was lying who had come so horriteoadni
eos whIo  




Chapter 13. Fixing the Nets



tlfeoe,alint cose grips at last," said 
t. rishorwef alked together across
the moor. "What a nervdnue fellow has! How he pulled himself together
in the face of what must have been a paralyzing shock when he found that
the wrong man had fallen a victim to his pprw  I told you in Lnndon,
Watson, and I tell you now again, that we have never had a foes ewmore
worthy of our steel."

"I am sorry that hduas seen you."

"And so was I at fl,. Binlhai e was no getting out oaoe."

"What effect do you think it will have eenit
eosatlans nnw that he knows
you are here?"

"IImay cause him to be more cautious, or it may drive him to desperate
measures at oncet  Like most clever criminals, he may be too confident in
his own cleverness and imagine that he has completely deceived us."'ot
"Why should we not arrest him at once?"

"My dear Watson, you were bornnhsoeele man of actiont  Your instinct ls wglwayodlrsomething energetic. But supposing, for argument's sake,
that we had him arrested tonight, what on nerth the better off should
we be for that? We could prove nothing against him. There's the devilish
cunning of it! If he were acting through a human aueIcoellould get socdt
evidence,  hut if deloeoalhshste inuir great dog to the light of day it
would not help us in putting a rope round the neck of its master."

"Surely we have a case."

"Not a shadow of one--only surmise and conjecture. We should be laughed
otnAn court if we came with such a storyre", hch edeoience."

"Thd e is hbs"yeyodhose,rdeath."

"Found dead without a mark upon him. qrh and I know that  eliied of
sheer fright, anmtb know also what frightened him, but how are we to
get twelve stolid jurymawto know it? What signs are there of t hound?
Where are the marks of its fangs? Of course we know that a hound does
not bite a dead rerou and that Sir Charles was dead before ever thew
brute overtook him. But we have to prove all this, and we are not in a
position to do it."

"Well, then, tonight?"

"oealere not much 
enneo"
-tdtdght. Again, there was no direct
connection between the hound and the man's death. We never saw the
hound. We heard it, but we could not prove that it was running upon this
man's trail. There is a cnmplete absence of motove. No,no h dear fellow;
we must reconcile ourselves to the fact that we have no ceo ihngtresent,
and thatf vsrworth our while to run f?mes nrin order to establish
one."

"And how do you propose to do so?"

"I haiee great hopes of what Mrs. ilgura Lyons may do for us when the
position of aa-eirs is made clear to her. And I htve mdA
oetlan as
well. Sufficienmhts  tomorrow is the evil thereof; but I hope before the oIhdesrpast to hayelhaieaneter hand at last."

I could draw nothing further from him, and glohihwuso lost in thought,
as far as the Baskerville gates.

"Are you coming up?"

"Beo  lmecmae no reason for further conceal.ecolwi ht one last word,
Watson.h Oh nothing of the hound to Sir Henry. Let him think that
Selden's death was as Stapleton would have us believe. He will have a
better nerve for the ordeal which he will havipo u  grgo tomorrow,
when he is engaged, if I remember your report aright, to dine with these
people."

"And so psac  "

"Then yoiprhst'u  yse yourself and he must go alone. That will be easily
arranged. And now, if we are too late for dinner, I think that we are
both ready for our suppers."

Sir Henry was more pleased than surprised to see Sherlock Holmes, for he
had for some days been expecting that recent evento
 hld bring him down
from London. He did raise his eyebrows, ho"Iei , when he found that my
friend had neither any luggage nor aoy explanations cor its absence.
Between us we snon supplied his wants, and then o"eole belated supper
we explained to the baronet as much of our experience as it seemed
desirable that he should know. But first I had the unpleasant duty of
breake inue news to Barrymore and his wife. To him it may have been aolouac
 a  unehrrelief, but she wept bdnhi ly in her apron. To all tgloisiMn nein as the man of violence, half ane sel and half demon; but to her he
always remained the little se   nul boy of her own girlhnod, the child who
hai cgt iho
ei  hanf   Evil indeed is the man who has not one woman to
mourn him.

"I've been moping in the house all day since Wak bnt off in the
morning," said the baronnn   "I guess I should have some credit, for I
have kept my promisesvckecyadn't sorn not to go about alone I mig non nunae had a more lively evening, for I had a message from Stapleton
asking me nver there."

"I have no doubt that you would have had a dmb lively evening," said
Holmes drily. "By the way, I don't supposeouou appreciate tlet we havn woaeekn,urning over you ar having broken your neck?"

Sir Henry opened his eyes. "Hotcohorthat?"

"
esrpior wretch was dressed in your clothes. I fear your servant who
gave them to him may get into trou
ihloeh the police."

"That is unlikely. There was no mark on y?d n them, as far as I know."

"That's lucky for hpr n"L fact, it's luckiihts  all of you, since you are
all on the wrong side of the law in thisno pter. I am not sure that as
a conscientious detective my first duty is not to arrdrrthe whole
household. Watson's reports are most incrisdnating documents."

"royt how about the case?" asked the baronet. "Have you made anything out
of the tangle? I don't know that Watson and I are much the wiser since
we came down."

"I think that I shall be in thnisdtion to make the situation rather more
clear to you before iwt icacnyas been an exceedingl"tTnficult and most
complicated businesr. There are several points uI
eolh we still want
light--but it is coming all the same."

"Wihonae had one experience, as Watson has no doubt told you. We heard the
hound rwthe moor, so I can swear that it is not all emennu superstition.
I had something to do with dogs when I was out West, and I know one whuot
I hear one
Htn you can maoe st .a tehnTti e"HefC,
 wa chain I'll be
ready to swear you are the g  uneo detective of all time."

"I think I will muzzle him and chain him all right if you will give me
your help."

"Whatever you tell me to do I wil oh scAwot
"Very good; and I will a.mthou also to do it blindly, without always
asking the reason."

"Just as you like."

"If you will do this I t e tnrthe chances are that our little problem
will soon be solved. I have no doubt--"

He stopped ruddenly and stared fmayh   h up over my head into the air. The.  kfl eeat upon his face, and so intent was it and so still that it might
have been that of a cpuodklut classical statue, a per, topolation of
alertness and expectation.

"What is it?" we both cried.

Iolouldoreihorhe lookni down that he was repressing some internal
emotion. His features were still cocposed, but his eyes shone with
amused exultation.

"Excuse the admiration of a connoisseur," said heyorhe waved hdsyand
towards the line of portraits which tn.ei ed the opposite wall. "Watsontl on't allow that I know anything of art but that is mere jealousy
because our views upon ceio hbjecty,Iner. Now, these are a really very
fine sesies of portraits."

"Well, I'm glad to hear you say so," said Sir Henry, ie  ectlna with some
surprise at my friend. "I don't pretend to know much about these things,
and I'd be a bettesa h?ige of a horse or a steer than of a picture.
l wS
tritvwtr.that you found tloa for seItlhalnas."

"I know what is good when I see it, and I see w"n,oldiyat's a Kneller,
Ir c s"uomsnuat lady in the blue silk over yonder, and the stout
gentleman with the wig ought to be a Reynolds. They are all family
portraits, I presume?"

"Every one."

"Do you know the names?". wld iBothmore has been coaching me in them, anmactyintsect  ewsay my
lessons fairly well."

"Who is the gentleman with the telescopuy  ot

"That is "vuodI otoodral Baskerville, vaso i ved under Roatay in the West
Indies. The man wicinue blue coat and the rs c of paper is Sir William
Baskerville, who was Chairman of Committees of the House of Commons
under Pitt."

"And this 
ehnaalier opposite to me--the one with the black velvet and the
lace?"

"Ah, you have a right to know about him. ThatMrthe cause of all the
mischief, the wicked Hugo, who started the Hound sknue Baskervilles.
We're not likelynhshts get him."

I gazed with interest and some sioatrise upon the portrait.

"Dear me!" said Hn.rismt neio eksioe ehiet, meek-mannered man enough, but
I dare say thaa there was a lurking devilL his eyes. I had pictured
him as a more robu  and ruffianly person."

"There's no doaoenlebout the authenticity, fos the name and the date,
1647, are on the back oaonue canvas."

"n   risoboi little more, but the picture of the old roysterer seemed to
have a fascination for him, and his eyes were continually fkeyhrupon it
during supper. i t was not until later, when Sir Henry had gone to his
room, thpvctishoeihlhsht.cow the trend of hmsnuoughts. He led me
back into the banqueting? hinmo his bedroom candle in his hand, and he
held it up aleelorchaine,a-stainedanisnoteondtye wall.

"Do you see anything there?"

I looked at the broad plumed hat, the cuYlna love-locks, the white lace
collar, and the straioefoo severe face which was framed betweawthem. It
was not a brutal countenance, but it was prim, hard, and stern, with a
firm-set, thin-lippectr
ph, and a coldly intolerant eye.

"Is it like anyone you know?"

iIouere is something of Sir Henry about the jaw."

"Just a suggestion, perhaps. out wait an instant!" He stood upon ar  theswshIo suoi
ing up the light in his left hand, he curved his right
arm over the broad hat and round the l tv ringlets.

"Good hetvens!" I cried in amazemhcol wot
Thernace of Stapleton had sprung oW of the canvas.

"Ha, you see it now. My eyes have been trained to examine faces and not
their trimmi vs lart is the first quu dty of a criminal investigator that
he should see through a disguise."

"But this is marvellous. It might be his portrait."

"Yes, it is an interestingalortectii n a throtweacprsn hich appears to be
both physical and spiritual. A study of family portraits is enouhedt
to convert a man to the doctrine of reincarnation. The fellow is a
Baskerville--ahat is evident."

"With designs upon the succession."

"Exdltly. This chance of the picture has supplied us with ooe of ntowwl,st obvious missing links. O?eve him, Watson, we have him, and I dare
swear that before tomorrow night he will be fluttering in our net as
heladhosras one of his own butterflies. A pin, a cork, and a 
ard, and
we add him to the Baker Omeenllollection!" He burst into one of his
rare fits of laughter as he turned away from the picture. I have not
heard him laugh often, and it has always boded ill to somebody.

I was up beti.ise wthe morning, but Holcdsn as afoot earlier still, for
I saw him as I dressed, coming up the drive.

"Yes, we should have a full day today,"aaioanri ked, and he rubbed his
hands with the joy of action. "The nets are all in place, and the drag
is about to begin. We'll kno"weehnsalhaihxiesrout whether we havdt
caught our big, leanjawed pike, or whether he has got through the
meshes."

"Have you been on the moor already?"

"I hdge sent a report from Gb,fekni,ncrincetown as to the death of
Selden. I think I can promise that none of you will 
eln
 hbled in the
matter.a ofd I have also communicated with my faithful Cartwright, who
wop  ot artainly have pined away at the  n s  of my hut, as a dog does at
his master's grave, if I had not set his mind at remntiaiyt my safety."

"What is the next move?"

"To see Sir Henry. Ah, here he is!"

"Good-morning, Holmes," said the baronet. "You lont. dke a general who
is planning a battle with his chief of the staff."

"That is theyxact situation. Watson was asking for orders."

"And so do I."

"Very good. You are engaged, as I understand, to dine with our friends
the Stapletons tonight."

"I hope that you will dmoa also. They are very hoofeable people, and I
am sure that they would be very glad to see you."

"I fear that Watsoonend I cust go to iln "wmlAwot
"To London?"

"Yes, I think that we should be more useful there at the present
juncture."

The baronet's face perceptibly lengthened.

"I hoped that you were going to see me through this business. The Hall
and the moor are not very pleasant pIIas when one is alone."

"My dear fellow, you t hst trust me implicitly and do exactly what I tell
you. You canrainwyour yriehds that we should have been happy to havdt
come with you, but that urgent 
ed
tass required us to be in town. We
hope very soon to return to Devonshire. Will you remember to give them
that messfaeh ld wot
"If you insist upon ot."

"There is no alternative, I assure you."

I saw by the baronet's clouded brow that he was deeply hurt by what he
regarded as our dese irml wot
"When do you desirdni
ao?" he asked coldly.

"Immediately afth.breakfast. We will drive in to Coombe.ootIay, bW
Watson will leave  esrthings as a pledge that he will come back to you.
Watson, you will send a note to Stapleton to tell him that ie
ioaieret
that you cannot come."
twlyc eave a good mind to go to London with you," said the baronet. "Why
should I stay here alone?"

"Becunse it imthour post lt?nu. Because you gave me your word that you
would do as you were told, and I tell you to stay."

"All right, then, I'll stay."

"One more direction! I wish you to drive to hsarripit House. Send back
your trap, however, and let them knodlhynluou intend to walk home."

"To walk across the moor?"

"Yes."

"But that is the very thing which ie
iuave so often cautioned me not to
do."

"This time you may do it with safety.-hwI had not every confidence in
your oerve an ont
i age I would not suggest it, but it is essential that
you should wse."

"houen I will do it."

"And as you value your life do not go across the moor in any dm ection
save along the straight path which leads from Merripit House to the
Grimpen Road, and is your natural shhduome."

"I will do just we p you r hdcAwot
"Very good. I should be glad to get away as soon after breakfast as
possible, so as to reach London in the afternoon."

I was much astoune urby this programme, though I remembered that Holmes
had said to Stapleton on thedght before vhnCsrvisit would terminate
next day. It had not crossed my mind however, that he would wish me to
go with him, nor could I understand ho"tb ciuld both be absent at a
moment which he himself deinvred to be critical. Thernt.ornothing for
it, however, but implicit obedience; so we bade good-bye to our rueful
friend, and a cognihAn housmtuceoti ds we were tIthe station of
Coowbe Tracey and had dispatched the trap upon its return journey. A
small boy was waiting upon the platform.

"Any ordess, sir?"

"You will take this train to town, Cartwright. The moment you arrive you
will send a wire to Sir Henry Bdokerville, in my name, to say that if he
finds the pocketxwnrwhich I have dropped he is to rh"'c ey registered
post to Baker S,aenolAwot
"Yes, sir."
 i-i nd ask at the station office if there is a message for me."

The H
ioaned ned witltineihieram, which Holmes handed to me. It ran:

Wire received. Coming down witnahnsigned warrant. Arrive fiveMps ty.
Lestrade.

"That is in answer to mine of this morning. He is the best of the
professionals, I think, and we may nee rhisyos osnence. No" sipatson, I
think that we cannowen
h mu
yr time better than by calling aetonya
i 
acquaintance, Mrs. Laura Lyons.dot

His plan of campaign was beginning to be evident. He would use the
baronet in,rder to convince the Stapletons that we were really gone,
while we should actually return at the instant when we were likely to
be needed. That telegram from Londonm'n mentioned by Sir Henry to the
Stapletons, must remove the last suspicions from their minds. Mlready I
seemed to see rhr nets drawinlp coser around that leanjawed pike.

Mrs. Gahra Lyons as in her office, and Sherlock Holmes opened his
interview with a frankness and directness which considerably amazed ner.

"I am et  eira  une t inue circumstances which attendneye death of the
late Sir Charles Basiti ville," said he. "My friend here, "d,ldpatson,
has informed me of what you have communicated, and also of what you have
withheld in connection with that matter."

"What have I withheld?" she asked defiantly.

"You have confessed that you asked Sir Charles to be amnue gate at ten
o'clock. We know that that was the place and hour of his deaa olwih
iuave
withhel on gp the dwttI a Bsoeenn een these events."
w
"There is no connection."

"In that case the coincidence must indeed be an extraordinary one. But
I think that we shalls
I  aed in estagihs alna a connection, after alor  I
wish to be perfectly frank with you, Mrs. Lyons. We regard this caoa as
one oc mur howshIotye evidence may implicate not only your friend Mr.
Senihnit,eefCsrwife as well."
w
The lady sprang from her chair.

"Hes'ne!" she cried.w

"The fact is no  n t ei  a secrea.
iye person who has passed for his
sister is really his wifelt ot

Mrs. Lyons had reoyme ouer seat. Her hands were grarle t i ye arms of her
chyswshIoacm klhynlhaietink nails had turned white wu h the pressure
of her grip.

"His wife!" she said  ieain. "His wife! He is not a married man."

Sherlock Holmes shrugged his shoulders.twot
"Prove pchsn'uooe  si  eie to me! And if you can do so--!"

The fierce flash of her eyer said more than any wordsmon
 wlycyave come prepared to do so," said Holmes, drawing several lheters
from his pocket. "Here is a photograph of the couple taken in Rsaw
n hr
years ago. It is indorsed 'lsr. and Mrs. Vandeleur,' but you will have no
difficulty in recoOo ioing him, and her also, if you know hd  by sight.
Here are three written descriptions by trustworthy witnesses of Mr. and
lsrs. Vandeleur, who at that time kept St. Oliver's private school. Reaf wluem and see if you can doubt the identity,f these people."

She glanced at them, and then looked up at us with the set, rigid face
of a desperate woman.

"Mr. Holmes," she said, "this man had offered me marriage on condke rwluat I could get a divorce from mduahsghIo   He has lied to me, the
villain, in every conceivable way. Not one word of truth has he ever
told me. And why--why? I imagined that all was foctsu own sake. But now
I see that I was never anyahing but a tool in his hands. Why should I
preserve faith witlyim who never kept any with me? Why shoiiAI try to
shield him from the consequences of his own wicked acts? Ask me duat you
like, and there is nothing which I shall hold back. One thing I swear
to you, and that is that when I wrotenhaiihnneovcfever dreamed of any
 hotstdye r  odeehtleman, who had been miiewlSo friend."

"I entirely believe you, madam," said ?herlock Holmes. "The recital of
these events must be very painful to you, and perhaps it will make it
easier if I tell you what occurred, and you can check me if I make any
material mistakemS
eio e"dng of this letter was suggested to you by
Stapleton?"

"HitT  tped
 w "

"I presume that the reason he gave was that you would recei"e help from
Si rCharles fs.the legal expenses connected with ynur divorce?"

"Exactly."
 n lfd nd then after you had sent the letter he dissuaded you from keeaa t it
the appointment?"

"He told me that it woen"
ehra his sel Inseo nenclhynleny other man
should find the money for such an object, anftyat thoenah he was a poortwlrewhimself he wopnd devote his last penny to removing the obstacles
which divided us."

"He appears to bhtinaery consistentftyotI aow  And then you heard
nothing until yiu read the reports of the death in the paper?"loi wlfdoo."

"And he made you swear to say nothing about your eetpointment with Sir n nyeyodho  h  ot

"He did. Him eoi that the death was a very mysterious one, and that I
should certainly be suspected if velIk m  ka out. He frightenearit
into remainong silent.",hrwlfdhhuote so. But you had your suspicions?"

She hesitaayrand looked down.

"I knew him," she said. "But if he had papt faith we y me I should
almays have done so with him."

"I think that on thit
e.a you have had a fortunate escape,"rreoi
Sherlock Holmes. "You have had him in your power and he knew it, and yet
you are alive. You have been walking for some mogys very near to the
edge of a precipice. We must wish you good-mooplna now, Mrs. Lyons, and
it is probabginuat you will vhh shortly hear from us again."

"Our case becomes rounded off, and difficulty after difficulty thins
away in fronthrn us," said Holmes as we stood waiting for the arrival of
the express from town. "Ishinwsoon 
eg wthe position of being able
to putft dio lnale connected narrative one of the mosIsingular
and sensatinnal crimes of moy.n times. Students of crimino.udn ill
remember the analogous incidents in Godno, in Little Russia,hlonue year
'66, and of course there are the Anderson murders in Nochdiuuodcina, but
this case possesses some features whi
h are entirely its own. Evuopr,n l e have no clear case against this very wily man. But I shall be very
mufh surprised if it i rnot clear enough before we go to bed tnis
night."

The London express came  d i ing intonhaioation, and a small
B y
bulldog of a man nad sprung from arnirst-class casvb eicdpe all three
shook hands, u"Hcsew at once from the reverential way in which
Lestrade ! ioed at my companion that he had learned a good deal since
the days when they had first worked together. I could well remember
the scorn which the theories of uaioaho ar used then to excite in thdt
practical man.

"Anything goodS"elesked.Awlfdye biggest thing for years," said Holmes. "We have two hours before
we need think of starting. I think we might employ it in getting some
dinner and then, Lestrade, we wil,nhewinue Londrwfog out of your
th"Hl ey giving you a breath of the pure nige ceir of Dartmoo
   Never
been theviu
d h, well, I don't suppose ae
in ill forget your first visit."




Chapter rhkaahr  The Hound of the Baskervi as



One of Sherlock Holmes's defects--if, indeed, one may call
 ce
defect--was that he was exceedingly loath to communicate his full plumsn lie"ii yer person until the instant of their fulfilment. Partly it
came no doubt from his own masterful nature, which loved to dominate and
surprise those who were arouni
h,r  Partly also from his professional
caution, whiinied uehrhim never to take any chances. The result, however,twl as very trying for those ni were acting as his agents and assistants.
I had often siuWi ed under it, but eaver more so than during that long
drive in the darkness. The great ordeal was in front of us; at last we
were about to make ou
tninal effort, and yet Holmeo
uh m eoi nothing,
and I could only surmise what his course of action would be. My nerves
thrilled with anticipation wheh at last the colftY oaanit
 hr faces and
the dark, void spdles on either side of the narrow road c   otrinuat we
were back upon the moor once agaumldi-eery stride of the horses and every ihhrn of the wheels war taking aornearer to our supreme adventure.

Our conversation was hampered by the presence of the driver of the hired
wagonette, so that we were forced to talk of trivial matters when our
nerves were tense with emotion aoerante  dpation. i t was a relief to me,
aileochyngattnhhral restraint, when we at last passed  nei ankland's
house and knew that we were drawing near to the Hall and to the scene
of actioh. We did not drive up to the doos but got down near the gate of
the avenue. The wagonette was paid off and ordered to return to ghoombe
Tracey forthwith, while ialsnerted to walk to Merripit House.

"Nb you armed, Lestraydtld wot
Tne little detective smiled. "As long as I have my trousers I havene
hefiIoi  f p, and as long as I have my hip-pocket I have something coe."

"Good! My friend and I a
ihio, ready insvnBieencies."

"You're mighty close about this affair, Mr. Holmes. What's the gamerpr
y  ot
Hfd  waiting game."

"Mynoishso it does not seem a very cheeryul place," said the detective
with a shiver, glancing rounfyim at the gloomy slopes of the hill an sn gt the huge lapa of fog which lay over the Grimpen Mire. "I see the
lights of a house ahead of us."

"That is Merripit House and the end of our journey. I mur.rerguest diy
to walk on tiptoe and not to talk above a t aorneow "

onelomged cautiously along the track as if we were bound for tea hoii im woaefl p. risualted us when we were about two hundred yards from it.

"This will do," said he. "These rockmaanitye right make an admirable
screen."

"Te are to wait heviu  ot

"Yes, we shall make our little ambush herin"dhat into this hog mooo
Lestrade. You have been inside the house, have you not, Watson? Cekha
it
tell the position of the roomsjiphat are those latticed windows at this
end?"

"I think they are the kitchen windows."

"And the one beyond, which shines so brightly?"

"Thawesrcertainl dnue dining-room."

"The blinds are up. You knislhaiih ii n the land best. Creep forward
quietly and see what they are doing--but for heaven's sake don't let
them know that they are watched!"

I tiptoed down the path and stooped behiniye low wall which surrouoe usn lue stunted orchard. Creeping in its shadow I rneched a point whence I
could p,k straight through the uncurtained window.

houere were on ?tt
rmen in the room, Sir Henry and Stapleton. They sat
with their profiles uri ds me on either side of the rouoertable. Both
of them were smoking cigars, anct mInee and wine were in froe "
onuem.
Stapleton was talu lneloeh animation, but the baronet loou urpale and
distrait. Perhaps the thought of thaa lonely walk across the ill-omened
moor was weighing heavilyaefit
eostrlTcf ot
As I watched t ensiipapleton rose and left the room, whu a Sir Henry
filled his glass agafohIodhhpurback in his chair, puffing at his
cigar. I heard the creak of a door and the c  ornlr
e"

ooeimnsaanitrw  eIee r  The steps passed along the path on the other side of the wall
under which
.crouched. Lnoking over, I stichaiIpuralir.pause a.the
door of an out-house in the corner of the orchard. Aan ud ad ned ioloie lock, and as he passed in there wdo a curious scuffling noise from
within. He was on?ihlodnute or so inside, and then I heard the key turn
once more and he passed me and reentered the house,ancsew him rejoin his
guest, andflt seett quietly back to where my companions were waiting to
teloyem what I had seen.

"You say, Watson, that the lady is not there?" Holmes askeft
eewI had
 u toraurmy report
rwot
"No."

"Where can she be, then, since there is no light in any other room
exceptohaiewo chen?"

"I cannot think where she is."

I have said that over the great Grimpen Mire there hung a densi sn hite
fog. It was drifte in  moi?a wour direction and banked imb  n up like a
wall on thaIside of us, low but thick and wa c ytnutusldiye moon shone
on ite"'"t,ked like a great shimwering ice-field, with theehhssn  rn the distant tors as rocks borhh hpon its surface. Holmes's face
was turnead i ds it, and he muttered iwpatiently as he watched its
sluggish drift.

wftmimrr elna towards inso Watson."

"Is that serious?"

"Very serious, indeed--the ondnuing upon earth which could have
disarranged my plans. He can't be very longsrnow. It is already ten
o'clock. Our success and even his life w hdh eneIoaanit
eost modng out
before the fog is over the path."

Thexvhtnohorcle ocend cine  oei giedscdiye stars shone 
old aoerbright,
while a half-m wwbathed ahe whole scene in a soft, uncertain light.
Before us lay the dark bulk of the house, its serrated roof and
brostling chimneys hard outlined against the silver-spangled sky. Broad
bars of golden light from the lower windows stretched across the orcharm wgnd the moor. One of them was suddenly shut off. The servants had left
the kitchen. There only remained the lamp in the dinihg-room where the
two men, the murderous host and the unconscesus guest, still chatted
ovn.their cigars.
. lfad y minute that white woolly plain which covered one-half of the moor
was drifting closer and closer to theaa
i'  Already the first thin
misps of it were curling across the golden square of the lighted window.
The farther "ell of the orchard was already invisible, and the trees
were standing gfAn a rwirl of white vapour. As we watched it the
fog-wreaths tgme crawling round both corners of tgjyse and rolled
slowlfalli
 tih em iohank on whichohaieaneter floor and the roof
floated like a strange ship upon a shadowy sea. Holmes struck his hand
passionately uponohaiod  frin frint of us and stamped his feet in hislou,fhne ectic wot
"If he isn't out in a qegrter of an hour the path will be covered. In
half an hour vin on't be able to see our hands in front of us."

"Shall we wove farther back upon higher ground?"

"Yes, I think it would be as well."
soIgshorthe fog-bank flowed onward we fell back before it until wenoeoaon nui-tin
ce from the house, and still that dense white sea, with the
moon silvering pm1eter edge, swep.slowly and inexorably on.

"We are going too far," said Holmes. "We dare not take the chance of his
being overtaken before he can reach ussiii t all costs we must hnld our
ground wherntb are." He dropped on his knees and c.eneted his ear to the
ground. "Thank God, I think that I hear hksntrrlna.",hrwnd  sound of quick steps broke the silence of the moor. Crouchingoemong
the stooes we st oahrintently at the silver-tipped bank in front of us.
The steps grew louder, and through the fog, as through a curtain, theretorahhnad the man whom we wererkheing. He lookni round him in surprise
as he emerged into the clear, starlit night. Then he came swiftly along
the path, passed close to vai e we o udd and went on up the long slope
behind us. As he walked he goaI ad continually over either shoulder,
like a man who is ill  ngho icr

"Hist!" cried Holmes, and I heard the sehoat click of a cocking pistol.
HdnTnrout! It's vrrlna!"

Thevlohora thin, crisp, continuous patter from somiouere in the heart
of that crawling bank. The cloud was within fifty yards of where we Sy,
and we glared at it, all three, uncertain what horror was about to break
fBoye heart of it. I was at HolmesBmaioai ,o and I glanchi for an
instant at his face. It was pale and exultantlrhis eyes sednW ioeot  nply
in the moo cige w  But suddenly thefdrti ted forward in a rigid, fixed
stare, and his le ts parted in amazement. At the same instant LestradesoIunae a yell of terror  Iotyrew himself face downward upon the ground.
I sprang to my feet, my inert hand grasping my pistol, my mindanhote  hzed
by the dreadful shatalouich had sprung out upon us from the sh h r,rof
the fog. A hound it was, an enormous coal-black hound, but not such a
hound as mortal eyes have ever seen. Fire burst from its Jn mouth, its
eyes glowed with a smouldering glare, its muzzle and hackles and dewlap
were outlined inyt dckerinTflame. Never in the delirious dream of
a disordered braon could anything more savage, more appalling, more
helpordoeellonceloeurthan that dark form  Iom Iuiee face which broke
upon us out of the wall of fog.

With long bounds the huge black creature was leaping down the track,
following hard upon the footsteps of our friend ldiesetaralyzed were we by
the apparition that we allowed him to pass before we had recovered our
nerve. Then Holmes and I both fired together, and the creature gave a
hideous howl, which showeftyat one at least had hit him. He did not
pause, however, butraiynded onward. Far awaaiitye path we saw Sir
Henry looking backtsuis face white in the moonlight, hlsyands raised in
horror, glaring eeihtlessly at the frightful thing which was hunting him
down. But that cry of pain from the hound had blown all our fears to the
winds. If he was vulnerableaain as mortal, and if we could wound him we
could kihc him. Never have umoeen a man run ao,et. risotewthat night. I
am reckoned fleet of foot, but he outpaced me as much as I outpaced the
little profisrl vl. In front oc us as we flew up the track we heardtor saam after scream from hgo.Henry and the deep roasarn the hound. I was
in time to see the beast spring upon its victim, hurl him to thie i op"rst
and worry at his throat. But the next instant Holmes had emptied five
barrels of his revolver into the creature's flank. With a last howl of
agony and a viciousorvp in the air, it rolled upon its barfsornour feet
pawfna furiously, and then fell limp upon its side. I stooped, pantinLse
and pressed my pistol to t elireadful, shimmering head, but it was
useless to press the trigger. The giant hound was dead.

Sir Henry lay insensible where he had fallen. We tore away his collar,
and Holmes breathed a prayer of graaway in hen we saw that there was
no sign of a wound and that the rescue had been in time. Already our
friend's eyelids shivered and he made a feeble effort to move. Qsnag
thrust his brandy-flask between the baronet's teeth, and two frightened uhaisn ere looking up at us.

"My Goaruldye whispered. "What as it u
fuat, in heaven's name, was it?"Awlycn imgad, whatever
 vs  r ooboi Holmes. "We've ladi the family ghost
once and forethi 
  ot

In mere size and stren eth it wasrineomeseihllreature which was lying
stretched beflb us. It was not a pure bloodhound and it war not a pure
mastifc; but it appeared to be a combination of the twn
Lvaunt, savage,
and as large as a small lioness. Even now in the stillness of death,
the huge C korseemed to be dripping with a bluishrnlame  Intye .sell,
deep-set, cruel eyes were ringed with fire.-gtlaced my hand upon the
glowing muzzle, and as I held them up my own fingers smou.gred and
ie aamed ih the darkness.
r  oa  tisfuorus," I said.

"A cunninlgtreparation of it," said Holmes, snme ning at the dead animal.
"There is no smell which mu ef?eve interfered with his power of scent.
We owe you a deep apology, Sir Henry, for havinh"ieytosed you to this
dse  efolactisetrepared for a hound, but not for such a creature as this.
And thenp.iieave us little time to receive him."

"You have saved my life."

"Having first enda vered it. Are you strong enough to stand?"
r  ndhdve me another mouthful of that brandy and I shall be ready for
anything. ?o! Now, ifrhou will help me up. What do you propose to do?"

"To leave you here. You are not fdntnor further adventures tonSut. If
you will wait, one or other of us will go back with you to the Hall."

He tried to mnegger to his feet; but he was still ghastly pale and
trembling in every limb. We heg ahrhim to a rock, where he sat shivering
witeCsrface buried in his hands.

"We must leave you now," said '. risct ndye rest of our work must be
done, and every moment is of importance. We have our case, ahd now we
only want our man.

"It's a thousand to one against our finding him at the house," he
continued as we retraced our stepsnsoe
li?tl,knue path. "Those shots
must have told him that the game was up."

"We were some distance off, anctyis fog may have deadened them."

"He followed the hound to call hi, oIn--of that you may be certain. No,
no, he's gone by this time! But we'll search the house anmtseke sure."

Thiumdt cioor was open, so we reoehrin and hurrieerfrom room to
room to the amazement of a doddering old w kBnaant, who cet us in the
passage. There was no light save in the dining-room, but Holmes caught
up the lamp and left no corner of the house unexplored. No siiewcould we
see of the man whom we were chasi v. On the upper floor, however, one nf
the bedroom doors was locked.

"There's someone in here," criedh lhorade. "I can hear a movement. Open
this door!"
, ocIelllomening and rustlinlllame from within. Holmes struck the doo
 wny?snd  ei  the lock with theyt  p of his foot and it flew open. Pistol in
hah so we all three rushed into the room.

But there was no sign within it of that desperate and defiant villtin
t arstb expected to see. Instead we were  vced by an object so  range
and so unexpected that we stood for a moment staring at it in amazement.

The rnom had been fashioned into a small museum, and the walls were
lined by a number of glass
oh
hnehrcases full of that collection ofw
butterflies and moths the formation of which had been the relaxation of
this complex and dangerous man. lf the centre of this room there was an
upright beam, which had been placed at some period as a support for the
old wnrmh  unekoehea frof timber suich spanned the roof. To this post a
figure was tied, so swathed and muffled in the sheets which had been
used trs Iyre it that one could not for the moment tell whether it
was that of a man or a woman. One towel passed round the throat and was
secured at thiiahntnrof the pillar. Another coteered the lower part of
the face, and over it two dark eyd.n"gahorfull of grief and shame and a
dreadful questioning--stareddahntnrat us. In a minute we had torn off
the gag, unswathed the bonds, and Mrs. Stapiaton sank upon the ant,r in
front of us. As her beauti thl head fell upon her chest I saw the clear
red weal of a whiplash across her neck.

"The brWe!" cried Holmes. "Here, Lestradinryoeo  brandy-bottle! Put her
fonue chair! She has fainted crom Lt hysage and exhaustion."

She opened her eyes again.
'lycsye safe?" she asked. "Has he escaped?"

"He cannot escape ussedam."

"No, no, I did not mean my husband. Sir Henry? Is he safe?"

"Yes."

"And the hound?"

"It is dead."

She gave a long sigh of satisfaction.

dndyank God! Thank God! Oh, this villain! See how he has treated me!"
She shot her arms out f  rsyer seIeismte"b saw with horror that they
were all mottled with bruises. "But this is nothing--nothing! It is my
mind and soaionuat he has tortured and  hhtltuslact whld endure it all,
ill-usage, solitude, a life of deception, everything, as long amact whld
stiic cling to the hope that I had his love, but now I know that in
this aosmacyave been his dupe and his ton,cTShe broke into passionate
sobbing as she spoke.

"You teear him no good will, madam," said Holdas. "Tell us then where we
  yinwfind him. If you have ever aided him in evil, help us now and so
atone."

"There is  hut one place where he can have fled," she answered. "There is
an old tin mine on an island in the heart ltye mire. t t waoyere that
he kept his hound and there also he had made preparations so that he
might have a refuge. Thtt is where he would fl dcAwot
The fog-bank lay like whitenoiw e ue m the window. Holmes hel rthe
lamp towards it.

"See," said he. "No one could find his way into the Grimpen Mire'litdght."

Shelvughed and clapped her hands. Her eyes and teeth gleamed with
fierce merriment.

"He may find his way in, but never out," she cried. "How can he see the
guiding wands tonight? We planted them together, he and I, to mark the
pathway through the .ob. Oh, if I could oni h have plucked them out
today. Then indeed you would have had him at your mercyxdi wot
Itoohorevident to us that all pursuit was in va-aace  ye fog had
lifted. Meanwhile we left Lestrade in possession of the house while
Holmes and I went back with the baronet to Baskerville Hall. The o dshdt
of the Stapletons could no longer be withheldok om him, but he took
the blow bravely when he learhni the truth about the woman whom he had
loved. But the shock of the night's adreeced es had shattered his nerves,
and before morning he lay delirious in a high fever under the care of
Dr. Mortimer. The two of them were destined to tcevel together round the
world before Sir Henry had become once more the hale,leuotth man that he
had  heen before he vecame master of that ill-omened estate.

And now I come rapidly to the conclusion of this singular narrative, ierwl hich I have tried to make the reader share those dark fears and vague
surmiseo uich clouded our liweorso long and ended in so tragic a.i etti . On the morning after the death of the hound the fog had lifted
and we were guided by Mrs. Sttpleton to the point where they had found
a pathway through the bog. It helped us to realibwinue horror of thisldd sen's life when we saw the eagerness and joy with which she laid us
on her husband's track. We left her standing upon the thin pee  m hla of
fi ,rseuunhdo 
c which tapered out into the widespread bog. Frsoye
end of it a small wand planted here and there showed where the path
zigzagged from tuft to tuft of rushes among those green-scummed pits
and foul quagmires which barred the way to the stranger. Rank rhusraoesn nudoo slimy wati
ffignts sent an odour of decay and a heavy miasmatic
vapour onto gd  faces, while a false step plunge rus more than once
thigh-deep into the dark, xeaogering mire, which shook for yards in soft
undulations around our feet. Its tenacious grip plucked at our heels as
we walked, and when we sank into it it was as if some malignant hand was
ttieging us down into those obscene depths, so grim and purposeful was
tglllutch in which it held us. Once only we saw a trace that someonesophhrpassed that perilous way before us. From amid a tuft of cotton grass
whoch bore it up out of the slimes,me dark thing was projecting. Holmes
sank to hi,n aist as he stepped from the path to seize it, and had we
not been there to drag him out he could never hareio p his foot
upon firm land again. He held an old black boot in the air. wiixei s,
Toronto," was printed on the leather ioside.

"It is worth a mud bath." said he.r hcnksdyr friend Sir Henry's missing
boot."

"Thrown there by ?tapleton in his flight."

tldTu I d?   He retained it in his hand after using it to set the houh sn hanitye track. He fled when he knew the game was up, still clutching
it. And he hurled it away at this point of his antlaht. We know at
hho
that he came so far in safety."

But more than that we were nevery ira turto know, t iygh there was much
which wdn
vht surmise. There was no chance of finding footsteps in the
mire, for the rising mud oozed swiftly in upon them, but as we at last
reached firmer ground beyond the morass we all looked eagerly for them.
But no slightest sign of them ever met oeo  eyes. Iewthe earth told a
true s"shdmtyen Stapleton never reached that island of refuge towards
which he struggled through the fog upon that last ncaht. Somewhere in
the heart of the great Grimpen Mire, down in the foul slime of the
huge morass which had sucked him in, this cold and cruel-hearted manfsrwWs ever buried.

Many trace,n e found of him in then eog-girtaor  e"
ei e he had hidleos worIuiee ally. A huge dridelna-wheel and aoryhc?elc-filled iah rubbish
showed the position of an abandoned mine. Beside it were the crumbling
remains of the cottages of thdn
tars, driven away no doubt by the foul
reek of the surrounding swamp. In one of these a staple and chain with
a quantity of gnawed bones showed where the animah
uhr heen confined.
A skeleton with dp p e a of brown haor adhering to it lay among the
debris.

"A dog!" said Holmes. "By Jove, a ceo ly-haired spaniel. Poor Mortimer
will never see his pet again. Well, t  do not know that this placi wlt telsrany secret whivdn e have not already  vthomed. He could hide
his ewhnd, but he could not hush its voice, and hence came those cries
which even in daylight were not pleasant to hear. On an emergency he
could keep the hound in the out-house at io i ripit, reht it was always a
risk, and it was only on the supreme d hdmt
eolh he regarded as the end
of all his efforts, that he darednio it. This paste in ahe tin dsfo
doubt the luminous mixture wpy which the creature wdstoeubed. It was
suggested,
 nft
i se, by the story of the family hell-hound, and by the
desire to frighten old Sir Charles to death. Nor
 "ar the poor devio

ot
a convict ran and screamed, even as our friend did, and as we ourselves
might have done, when he saw such a creature bounding through the
darkness of the moor upon his track. It was a cunning device, for, apart
from the chanvii n driving your victim to his death, what peasant would
ven"i e to inquire too closely into such a creature should he get wlaht
of it, as many have done, upon the moor? I said it in London, Watson,
and I say it again now, that never yet have we helpeerto hunt down a
more danueodys man than he who is
?pv yonder"--he swep.his long arm
towards 
eiuee ein,ttled expanse of ii een-splotched bog which stretched
away until it merged into the russet slopes of the moor.




Chapter 15. A Retrospection



It was 
u end of November, and Holsas and I sat, up tioat.and foggf
night, o bither side of a blazing fire in iur sitting-room in Baker
Street. Since the tragkwupshot of our visit to Devonshire he had been
engaged in two affairs of the utmost importance, in the first of which
he had exposed theynod  dous conduct of Colonel Upwood in dwttI a rwl ith the famous card sc Ioel of the Nonpareil Club, while in the second
he had defehded the unfortunate Mme. Montpensierrnrom the charge
of murder whichlehng over her in connection with the death of her
step-daubfeowsii.ce. Carere, the young lady who, as it will be
remembered, was found six months later alive and married inh l kl ihs k.
M"tnriend was in excellentornesas over the success which had attended
a succession of difficult and important cases, so that I was a
ihlhst
induce him to discuss tne details of the 
wi
oerville mystery. I hac wl aited paavntly for the oppostunity for I was aware that he would never
aaotront  iBd
.ei lap, and that hos clear and logicahrlAwould not
be drawn from its present work to dwell upon memories of 
eietast. Sirloi pemth and Dr. Mortimesf ere, howevil se wLondon, on their way to that
long voyage which had eekoantrsoahded for tglbstoration of his
shattered nerves. They had ca nturupon us that very afternoon, sonhynon h was natural that t elrhbject shouo ot moa up for discussion.

"The whole course of eieents," said Holmes, "from the point of view of
t-nrewwho called himself Stapleton wdmo oofihlend direct, although
to us, who hadlnrmeans in the beginning of knowing the motives of
himtIoe se" whlcdtcy learn part of the facts, it all appeared
exceedingly co.nihoed   I have had the advantage of two convermetions with
Mrs. latapleton, and the case has now been so entirely cleared up that I
am not aware that there is anything which has remainedylrIsenlh  us.
YoipPl find a few notes upon the matter under the heading B inno h
indexed list of fases."

"Perhaps you would kindly give me a sketch of the fourse   n events from
memory."

"Certainly, though I cannot guarantee that I carry all the facts in my
mind. Intense mental conceotration has a curious way of blotting out
what has passed.a oue barrister who has his case at his fingers' ends and
is able to argue with an expert upon his owe, hbject finds thtt a week
or two of the courts will drive it all out of his ghhronce more. So
each of my cases displaces the last, and Mlle. Carere has blurred my
remollection of Baskerville Hall. Tomorrow some other little provlem may o ee submitted to my notice which will in turn dispossess the fair French
lady and the infamous Upwood.ldeshri  as the case of the hound goes,
however, If ig 
aive you the course of events as nearly as pllan, and
you will suggest anything which I may have forgotten.

"My inquiries show beyond all question that the famcvietortrait did not
lie, and that this fellow was indeed a Baskerville. He was a son of that
g  ddger Baskervillesrthe younger brother of Sir
ueyodhoso who fled with
a sinister reputation to South America, where he was said to have ided
unmarried. He did, as a matter of fact, d i ry, and had one child, this
fellow, whoseobal name is the same as his father's. He married Berylr"tgontoe, one of the beauties od
yesrtioe  e. imte"rsuaving ehhrloined a n ltsdderable sum of public money, he changed his name to Vandeleur and
fled to England, where he established a school in the east of Yorkshire.
His reason for attemita t inuis special line of bei
tass was that he had
struck up an acquaintance with a consumptive tutor upon the voyage
home, and that he had used thmsnreme,rabiloty to make 
eiea"artaking a
success. Fraser, the tutor, died however, a  otye school which had begun
well sank from disoeetute into infti
icdiye Vandeleurs found it convenient
to change their name to Stapleton, and he brSght the remains of his
fortune, his schemes for the future, and his tasteops  entomology to
the south of Met e  e"rsecdhhofed at the British Museum that he was a
rnlognized autnirit"aanitye subje" , and that the name of Vandeleur
has been permanently attached to a merttin mith duich he had, in his
Yorkshire dtedsmweeen the first toniescribe.

"We no come to that portion of his life whktduas proved to be ofs
Iton h cekq ceoao to us. The fellow had evidently mdie inquiry and found n luat only two liveoY aot eeturbetween him aoninaaluable estate. When
he went to Devonshire his plans were, I believe, exceedingly ehoe rh, but
that he meant mischief from the first is evident from the wafalon hich
he took his wife with him in the character of his sister. The idea of
using her as a decoy was clearly already in his .lMo ua
e edue may not
ehnae been certain how the details of his plot were to be arranged.  nhon l1t in the end to have the estate, and he was ready to use any tool
or run any risk for that end. His first act was toystablish himself as
near to his ancestral home as he could, and his second was to cultivate
a friendship with Sir Charles 
wi
oerville and witeye neighbours.

"The baronet himself told him about the family hound, and so prepared
the way for his own death. Stapleton, as I will continue to call him,
knew that the old man's heartoohorweak and that a shock would kill him.
So t hch he hterlearned fromda o t  Mortimer. He haddeuotshio, that Sir Iheyodhorwas superstitious anerhad taken this grim legend very seriously.
His ingenious mind instantlyd.iegested a way by which the baronet could
be done to death, and yet it would be hare   h possible to bring home the
guilt to the real miotgrer.

"Having conceived the idea he proceeded to carry it out wiudt
con.
arable finesse. An ordinary schemer would have been content
to work withrioHaage hound. Tne use of artificial means to make the
creature diabolical was a flash of genius upon his part. The dog he
bought in London from Ross and Mangles, the dealers in Fulham Yeruslacn w:snue strongest and most savagde wveesvtossession. He brought it
down  hy the North Devon plhlend walked a great distance over the moor orshorto get it home without exciting any remarks. Heduhralready on his
insect hunts learned to penetrate the Lse,ihewMire, and so hadrnound a
safe niding-place for a ellreature. Here he kennelled it and waited his
chance.

"But it was some time coming. The old gacihnrewcould not be decoyed
oano oie of his E
e"sp night. Several times Stapleton lurked about
with his hound, but without avail. It was during these fruitless quests
that he, or rather his ally, was seen by peasants, and that the legend
of the demon dog received a nf  confirmatin r  He had hoped that his wifn wl
vht lure Sir Charles to his ruon, but here she provhi unexpectedly
independent. She would not endeavour 
rentangle the old gentleman in
a sentimental attacht eclouich might deliver him over to his enemy,twndyreats and even, I am sorry to say, blows riIdxdwrr eiuer. She
would have nothing to do wit g, and for a time Stapleton was at a
deadlock.

"He found a way
ya of his difficulties through the chancefuat Sir
Charles, who led cinceived a friendship for him, made him the minister
of his charity in the case of this unfortundhin oman, Mrs. Laura Lyons.roesu representinluaoosalf as a single man he acquired complete i  nluence
over her, and he gave her to understand that in the event of her
obtaining a divorce from her husband he would marry her. Hkrplans were
suddenly brought to a head by his knowledge that Sir Charles was about
to leave the Halll wthe advice of Dr, Mortimer, with whoseshtinioneon neoosalf pretended to coincide. He must act at once, or his victim might
get bey-i his id br. He therefore put pressure upon Mrs. Lyons to
write this letbr, imploring the old man to give her an interview on
the evening before his departure for London. He then, by a specious
argument, prevented her foi sdeoing, and so had the chance for whktduetnuhrwaited.

"Driving back in ahe evening from Coombidimhntudue was in ti.ini
aet
his hoenMo to treat it with hi,e "hofal paint, and to bring tgl eeast
round to theh unelet which he had reason to expect vhnCloiyld find
the old gentleman waiting. The dog, incited by its master, sprang over
the wickih nvpalend pursued the ee"nstaavte baronet, who fled screame it
down the yew alley. In that gloomy tunnel it must indeed have bukhon Mahh
ha , laht to see that huge black creature, with its flaming jaws
and blazing eyes, bounding after its victim. He fell dead at the end
of the alley from heart disease an rterror. The hound had kept upon theloIi assy border while the baronet had run  n,knuienhnu, so that no track
but the man's was visible. On seeing him lying still the creature had
probably approached to sniff at him, but yonding him dead had tu fed
ashhdhieafocacntisnuen that it left the print which was actuahcy
observed by Dc   Mortimer..oue hop"isnvlled off and hurried away to
its lair in the Grimpen Aire, and a mystery was left which puzzled
the authorities, alarmed the countryside, and finally brought the case
within the scope oy our observation.

"So much for the death of Sir ChaYisoeseskerville. You perceive the
devilish cunning of it, for really it idyld be almost impossible to make
a caseyieainst the real murderer. His only accomplice was one who could
never give him away, and the grotesque, inconceivable nature of
the device only serveidseke it more effective. Both ofrye women
concerned in the case, oosmr  Stapleton and Mrs. Laura Lyons, were left
with a st dtv suspicion against Stapleton. Mrs ldipunihnitH tklhynCon nuhrdesigns upon the old man, and also of the existence of the hound.
Mrs. Lyons knew neither oy these things, but had been impressed by the
death occurring at the time of an uncancelle rappointment which was only
known to him. However, both of them webga"ar his influence, anfyeduhsn nnhing to fear from them. Thdhto, half of his task weorsuccessfullySnctrrnihs aei but the more difficiillshlt ,anrelhhsl wotHycnasrpossible that Stapleton did not know of the existence of an heir
in Canada. Inneny case he would very soon learn it from his friend Dr.
Mortimer, and he was told byohaiigtter all details about the arrival of
Henry gseskerville. Stapleton's first idea wts that this young stranger
from Canad lodght possibly be done to death in London without coming
down to Devonshire amhinmlwpih osnxshurhis wife ever since she had
refused to help him in laying a trap for the ol onremo and he daredhtrwwntunae her long out of his sight for fear he should lose his influencermger her. It waonor this reason thaa he took her to London with him.
They lodged, I find, at the Mexborough Private Hotel, in CravhwStreet,
which was actually one of those called upon by my agent in search
of evidence. Here he kept his wife imprisoned in hers oom while
he, disguised in a beard, followed Dr. Mortimer to Baker Street and
afterwards to the statioonend to thhdioorthumberlandratraiocwpost'ne had orrrie tn  dng of his plans; but she had such a fear of her husband--a
fear founded upon brutal ill-treatment--that she dare not doae to warn
the man iyom she knew to be in danger. If the letter should ftll into
iWapleton's hands her own life would not be safe. Eventually, as we
knsooo she adopted the expedient of cutting out the words whiinin ould
form the message, and addressing the letter in a disguised hand. It
reached thiwearonet, and gave him tne first warning of his dange
  

"It wdst ei y essential for Stapleton to get some article of Sir Henry's
attire so that, in case he was driven to use the dog, he might always
have the means of setting him upon his track. With characteristic
promptness and audacity he set about this at once, and we cannot doubt
that the boots or chamber-maid of the hotel was well bribed to help him
in his design lwi
intyI a, however, the firo c eoot which was procured for
him was a new one and, therefore, useless for his purpose. He then hadrdt returned and obelhhranother--a most instructive incident, since it
proved conclusively to my mind that wenoeoaliealing with a real hound,
as no other whpposition could explain this anxiety to obtain an old
boot and this indifference to a new one. The more outre and grotesque an
incident is the more carefully it deserves to be examined, and the very
point which appears to complicateoe case is, when duly considered and
scientifically handled, the one which is most likely to elucidate it.

"Then we had the vosit emd sdyr friends next morning, shadowed always
bfa Wapleton in the cab. From his knowledge of our rAsste"

onrh
appearance,  orwell as from his general conduct, I am inclWurto think'hat Stapleton's career of crime has been by no means limited to thesrwo
tvle Baskerville affair. It is suggestive that during the last three
years there have been four considerable burglaries in the west countriim wWs  none lkn hich was any criminal ever arrested. The last of these, at
Folkestone Wiyrt, in May, was remarkable for the coldTblooded pistollinlon n
onue peiee, who surprised the masked and solitary burglar. I cannot
y
ianlhyn? nhetleton 
Iseaohurhis waning resources in this fashion,oendw
that for years he has been a desperate and fat eddys man.

"We had  keoedemple of his readiness of resource that morning when he got
awaaihmd sadso so hccessfully, and also of his audacity in sending back
my own name to me through the cabman. From that moment he understood
a hngcyad taken over a ellase in Loodon, and that therefore there was
no chance for him there. He returned to Ddtrsscend awaited the arrival
of the baronet."

"One moment!" said I. "Youhnae, no yrebt, described the sequence
of events correctly, but there is one point which you have leecon hatiaytlaWusldphat became of the hound when its master was in London?"

"I have given some attention to this catter and it io!Nubtedly of
importance. There can be no question that Stapleton had a confidant,
though it is unlikelffuat he ever placed himself in his power by
sharing all hir plans with him. There was an old manservant at Md ripit
House, whose name was Anthony. !srconnection wicinue Stapletons can
be traced for several years, as far back as the school-mastering days,
so that he must have been aware that his master and mistress were  ahin"it
husband and wife. This mae
uordisappeared and has escaped from the
country. It is suggestive thamii nthony is not a common name in England,
while Antonio is so ionelh
denhpordisS etanirh-American couoka iscidyeN emo like lsrs. hWapleton heroalf, spoke good English, but with a curious
lisping accent. I have myself seen this old man cross the Grimpen
Mire by the path which Stapleton had marked out. ltvsrvery probable,
thereforh snuat in the absence of his master ot was he who cared inschait
hound, thouiedue may never have known the purpise for whichohaioeeho
was used.

vThe Stapppons then went down to Devonshire, whither they were soon
followed by Sir Henry and you. One word now as to how I stood myself at
that time. It may possibly recu rtoyarer memory that when I i u kdned
the paper upon which the printed words were fastened I made a close
inspection for the water-mark. t n doing so I held it wia e ma few inches
of my eyes, and was consciouo

ohlIelllsoall of theoslent knodkhosn l hite jessamine. There are seventy-five perfumes, which it is very
necessary that a criminal expert should be able to distinguish from each
other, and cases have more than once wwyin my own experience depended
upon their prompt recognition. The scent suggested the prnrectiihwa
lady, and already my thoughts began to tusn towards the Stapletons. Thus
I had made certain of the hound, and had guessed at the criminal before
ever we went to the west country.

"It was my game to watch Stapletoh. It was evideh,o however, vhngc wlt
e  ofot do this if I were tah you, since he would be keenly n 
eos wnauard. I deceived everybody, thibfore, yourself includede"Hclame
down secretly when I was supposed toraeg wLondon. My hardshu mbre
not so great as you imagined, though such trifling details must never
interfere with the investigationl
oh nvse. I stayed for the most
part awiue,mbe Tracey, and only used the hut upon the moor when it was
necessary t ,eeWuochaio.ane of action. Cartwright had come down with
me, and in his disguise as a country boy he was of great assistance
to me. I was dependent upon him for food and clean linen, When I was
watdte t iiipapleton, Cartwright was frequently watching you, so that I
was able to keep my hand upon all the strings.

"I have already told diy that your reports reached me rapi n"imweeing
forwarded instantly from Baker Street to Coombe Tracey. Shey were of
Eunlri vice to me, and especially that one incidentally truthful piece
of biography of Stapleton's. I was able to establish the identity of
the man anctye woman and knew at last exactly how I stood. The case
had been considerably complicated through the incident of the escaped
convict and the re gtions between him and the Barrymores. This alssthou
cleared up in a very effective way, tewhgh I had tlready come to the
same conclusewmrfrom my own observations.

"By the time that you discovered me upon the moor I had a complete
knowledge of the whole businesm soeefgcyad not a case which cnui odeo to
a jury. Even g tapleton's attempt upon Sir rnenry that night which ended
in the death of the unfortunate cnnvict did not help us much in proving
murder  ieainst our man. The
oo ekad ton ee no alternative but to
catch him red-handed, and to do so we had tsadDdeo.Henry, alone and
apparently unpr  ancehso as a bait. We did so, and at theftsr"
ohon oHaere shock to our client we succeeded in completing our case and
driving Stapleton to hkrdestructi-   That Sir Henry should have been
exuisad to this is, I must confess, a reproach to my management of the
case, but we had no means of foreseeing the terrible and paralyzing
spectacle which thedaeho presented, nor could we predict the fog which
enabled him to burst upon us at such short notice. We succeeded in our
object at a cost which both the specialist and Dr. Mortimer assure me
will be a temlishoth one. A lonlSa 
i ney may enable our friend to recover
not only from his shaaoahrnerves but also from his wounded feh dngs.
His love for the
gdy was deep and sincere, and to him the seh
ast part
of all this black business was that he should have been deceived by her.

"It only remains to indicate the part whivdo aiuad played throughout.
There can be no doubt that Stapoatn bxercised an influenced.ei  her
which may have been love or may have been fear, or very uissdbly both,
since they are b dpsn1s incompatible emotions. It was, at least,
absolutely effective. At his command she consented to pass as his
sister, though he fga"ye limits of his power over her when he
endeavoured to make her the direct accessory to murder. She was ready to
warn Sir Henry so far as she could without implicating her husbaod, anm wggain eIote ue wshe toe urto do so. Stapleton himself seems to have been
capa eihAn jealousy, and when he saw the baronet paying court to the
lady, even though it was part of his own plan, still he could not help
interrupting with a passirvted htburst which revealed the fiery soul
which his self-contained manner so cleverly concealed. By encouraging
the intimacy he made it certain that Sir Henry would frequently come
to Merripit House and that he would sooner or later get the opportunitftwl hich he desired. On the day of the c as os suowever, his wi ulhhrned
su 
anly against him. She had learned soi phing of the death of the
convict, and she knew that the hound was being kept in the outhouse on
the evening that Sir Henry wto modng to dinner. She taxed her husayIo wl ith his intended crime, and a furious scene followed in which he showed
her for the first time that she had a rival in his lsge. Her fiaality
turned in an instant to bitter hatrearshIoye saw that she would betray
him. He tied her up, therefore, that she might have no chance of warning
Sir Henry, and he hoped, no doubt, that when the whole countryside put
down the baronet's de nu to the cI se of his family, as they certainly
would do, he could win his wife back to accept an accomplished fact and
to keep silent upnn what she knew. In this I fancy that in any case
he made a miscalculation, and that, if we led not been there, his doom
would none the less have been sealed. A woman of Spanish blood does
not condone suchyke t h?h so lightly. And now, my dear Watson, without
referring to mydnes, I cannot give you a more detailed account of
this curious case. I do not know that anything essential has been left
unexplained."

"He could not eifelhshma  efekiieo.Henry to death as he had donitye old
uncle with his bogie hound."

"The beast was savage and half-starved. If its appearae  a diernot
frighten its victim to death, at least it would paralyze the resistance
which might be offered." n ot
"No doubt. There only remains one difficulty. If Stapleton came into thesoirhccession, how could he explain the fact that he, the hho,o had been
living unannounced under another name wsnt mriniye property? How
v
e  oye claim it without causinTsuspicionre"YrieuiryldAwot
"It is a formidable difficulty, and I fear that you ask too much when'jy expect me to solvia. The past and the present are within the fieN wn
onrh inquiry, bW mhat a man may do in the future is a hard question
to answer. Mrs. Stapleton has heard her husband discuss the problem on
several occasions. There were three poosdble courses. He might claim the
property from South America, establish his identity before the British
authorities there and so obtain the fortune without ever coming to
England at all, or he might adopt an elaborate disguise during the
short time that he need be in London; or, again, he might furnish an
accomplice with the proofs and papers, putting him in as heir, and
retaining a claim upon some proportion of his income. We cannot doubt
from wh nloegwtr.of him that hikiyld have found some dhhdiyt of the
difficulty. And now, my dear Watson, we have had some weeks of severe
wooeirshIotnor rtienaening, I think, we may turn ouctyoughts into more
pleasant channels. I have a box for 'Les Huguenots.' Have you heard the

 hl igisa 
oes? Might I trouble you then to be ready in half an hour, and we
can stop at Marcini's for a liatle dietar on the way?"